AN ACT
RELATING TO IMMUNIZATIONS; AMENDING SECTION 39-1118, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE
PROVISIONS REGARDING EXEMPTIONS; AND AMENDING SECTION 39-4802, IDAHO
CODE, TO REVISE PROVISIONS REGARDING EXEMPTIONS.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Idaho:
SECTION 1. That Section 39-1118, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
39-1118. IMMUNIZATION REQUIRED. (1) Within fourteen (14) days of a
child's initial attendance at any licensed daycare facility, the parent or
guardian shall provide an immunization record to the operator of the daycare
facility regarding the child's immunity to certain childhood diseases. This
record, signed by a physician or his representative or another licensed
health care professional, shall verify that the child has received or is in
the process of receiving immunizations as specified by the board; or can
effectively demonstrate, through verification in a form approved by the de-
partment, immunity gained through prior contraction of the disease.
Immunizations required and the manner and frequency of their adminis-
tration shall be as prescribed by the board and shall conform to recognized
standard medical practices in the state. The board shall promulgate appro-
priate rules for the enforcement of the required immunization program and
specify reporting requirements of daycare facilities, pursuant to the pro-
visions of chapter 52, title 67, Idaho Code.
(2) Any minor child whose parent or guardian has submitted to officials
of a licensed daycare facility a certificate signed by a physician licensed
by the state board of medicine stating that the physical condition of the
child is such that all or any of the required immunizations would endanger
the life or health of the child shall be exempt from the provisions of this
section. Any minor child whose parent or guardian has submitted a signed
statement to officials of the daycare facility stating their objections on
religious or other grounds shall be exempt from the provisions of this sec-
tion. The signed statement may appear in a letter from the parent or guardian
and is not required to be made on a form furnished by the state board of health
and welfare, a daycare or another entity.
SECTION 2. That Section 39-4802, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
39-4802. EXEMPTIONS. (1) Any minor child whose parent or guardian has
submitted to school officials a certificate signed by a physician licensed
by the state board of medicine stating that the physical condition of the
child is such that all or any of the required immunizations would endanger
the life or health of the child shall be exempt from the provisions of this
chapter.
(2) Any minor child whose parent or guardian has submitted a signed
statement to school officials stating their objections on religious or
other grounds shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. The
signed statement may appear in a letter from the parent or guardian and is
not required to be made on a form furnished by the state board of health and
welfare, a school or another entity.