AN ACT
RELATING TO SHERIFFS; AMENDING SECTION 31-830, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE TER-
MINOLOGY; AMENDING SECTION 31-4602, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE TERMINOLOGY;
AND AMENDING SECTION 49-443B, IDAHO CODE, TO PROVIDE LICENSE PLATE DES-
IGNATORS FOR VEHICLES BELONGING TO A SHERIFF'S OFFICE AND CERTAIN OTHER
VEHICLES AND TO PROVIDE AN EXEMPTION.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Idaho:
SECTION 1. That Section 31-830, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
31-830. AWARD TO COUNTY SHERIFF OR DEPUTY COUNTY SHERIFF OF HIS HAND-
GUN AND BADGE UPON RETIREMENT. (1) A county sheriff who retires during or
upon the completion of his term of office under the provisions of the pub-
lic employee retirement system of Idaho or the county's retirement system,
whether under disability retirement or otherwise, may, with the consent
of the board of county commissioners, be awarded his handgun and sheriff's
badge along with the identification card issued by the county sheriff's
department office. The identification card shall have "RETIRED" printed
on it, shall have no fixed expiration date and shall be signed by the county
sheriff.
(2) Upon recommendation of the county sheriff and with the consent of
the board of county commissioners, a deputy county sheriff holding police
officer member status under the public employee retirement system of Idaho
pursuant to section 59-1303(3)(b)(ii), Idaho Code, or if the county by
which he is employed does not participate in the system, who would qualify
for such status under the provisions of that section if the county were a
participant in the system, may, upon his retirement, be awarded his handgun
and sheriff's badge along with the identification card issued by the county
sheriff's department office. The identification card shall have "RETIRED"
printed on it, shall have no fixed expiration date and shall be signed by the
county sheriff. The award shall be available to any deputy county sheriff,
as defined above described in this section, who leaves his employment with
the county sheriff's department office to retire under the provisions of
the public employee retirement system of Idaho or the county's retirement
system, whether under disability retirement or otherwise.
SECTION 2. That Section 31-4602, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
31-4602. JUSTICE FUND ESTABLISHMENT. The board of county commis-
sioners of any county may, in conjunction with development of their annual
budget, by resolution adopted at a public meeting of the board, establish
a county justice fund to provide funding for the operation of the county
sheriff's department office, construction, remodeling, operation and
maintenance of county jails, juvenile detention facilities and/or county
courthouses, operation of the prosecuting attorney's office, provision of
public defender service and otherwise court-appointed counsel, and oper-
ation of the office of the clerk of the district court, to the extent that
operation of that office provides support for the district court. The jus-
tice fund shall be separate and distinct from the county current expense
fund and expenditures from the justice fund shall be solely dedicated to the
purposes set forth in this section.
At the discretion of the board of county commissioners, funds deposited
in the county justice fund may be allowed to accumulate over a period of years
for designated capital improvements or be expended on a regular basis.
SECTION 3. That Section 49-443B, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
49-443B. LICENSE PLATES FOR STATE VEHICLES AND VEHICLES BELONGING TO
TAXING DISTRICTS. (1) License plates for state vehicles and vehicles belong-
ing to taxing districts shall be valid for a period of seven (7) years pur-
suant to section 49-443(2), Idaho Code, and shall remain on the vehicle to
which it is issued until transferred to another vehicle or until it is can-
celed by the department. The department shall be reimbursed by state agen-
cies and the taxing districts for the cost of providing license plates. The
department may develop rules to administer this license plate program.
(2) Each license plate issued pursuant to this section shall bear a des-
ignator to identify the agency, entity or office to which a vehicle belongs
or, for trailers or motorcycles, to specify the plate type. Any vehicle with
a license plate issued pursuant to this section that does not comply with the
provisions of this subsection as of the effective date of this act shall be
reregistered, subject to a reregistration fee of twelve dollars and fifty
cents ($12.50), within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this act. The
designators shall be as follows:
Designator       Agency, entity, office, or plate type
A                Trailer (all weights); small plate
C                School district or miscellaneous city or county
agencies, entities or offices
D                Highway district
F                Fire district
G                Fish and game
H                Department of health and welfare
ISP              Idaho state police
J                Department of commerce or department of labor
L                Law enforcement
M                Motorcycle; small plate
P                City police
R               Department of parks and recreation
SO              Sheriff's office
T               Department of transportation
X               Miscellaneous state agencies, entities or offices
Y               Irrigation district
Z               Department of lands
(3) Personalized or specialty license plates are exempt from the provi-
sions of subsection (2) of this section.