AN ACT
RELATING TO CORRECTIONAL FACILITIES; PROVIDING LEGISLATIVE INTENT; AMEND-
ING SECTION 20-237B, IDAHO CODE, TO PROVIDE THAT PRIVATIZED MEDICAL
PROVIDERS SHALL MAKE CERTAIN PAYMENTS, TO PROVIDE FOR INPATIENT AND
OUTPATIENT HOSPITALIZATIONS AND EMERGENCY SERVICES, TO REVISE TER-
MINOLOGY, TO PROVIDE CERTAIN CONTRACTUAL REQUIREMENTS AND TO PROVIDE
APPLICABILITY; AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Idaho:
SECTION 1. LEGISLATIVE INTENT. It is the intent of the Legislature that
any amendments to Section 20-237B, Idaho Code, shall not apply retroactively
to any hospital medical services or non-hospital medical services provided
before the enactment of this act.
SECTION 2. That Section 20-237B, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
20-237B. MEDICAL COSTS OF STATE PRISONERS HOUSED IN CORRECTIONAL
FACILITIES. (1) The state board of correction or any privatized medical
provider under contract with the department of correction shall pay to a
provider of a medical service, other than hospital inpatient or outpatient
services, for any and all prisoners, committed to the custody of the de-
partment of correction, confined in a correctional facility, as defined in
section 18-101A(1), Idaho Code, an amount no greater than equal to the reim-
bursement rates applicable based on of the Idaho medicaid reimbursement rate
fee schedule in place at the time services are provided. Hospitals shall
be paid for inpatient and outpatient facility services provided to such
prisoners in an amount equal to the interim Idaho medicaid rates in place
at the time of service except for outpatient services paid by Idaho medic-
aid according to the Idaho medicaid fee schedule. This These limitations
applies apply to all medical care services provided outside the facility,
including inpatient and outpatient hospitalizations, emergency services,
professional services, durable and nondurable goods, prescription drugs and
medications provided to any and all prisoners confined in a correctional
facility, as defined in section 18-101A(1), Idaho Code. For required ser-
vices that are not included in the Idaho medicaid reimbursement fee schedule
or the interim Idaho medicaid rates, the state board of correction or any
privatized medical provider under contract with the department of correc-
tion shall pay the reasonable value of such service. If a privatized medical
provider is contracted with the department of correction, no hospital or
any medical services provider shall be required to provide medical services
to prisoners, except for emergency hospital services, in the absence of a
contract between the privatized medical provider and the hospital or medi-
cal services provider. Any contract between the department of correction
and a privatized medical provider must contain a requirement that the pri-
vatized medical provider enter into contracts with each hospital providing
non-emergency services outside of the correctional facility. The contract
between the privatized medical provider and the department of correction
shall require, and the contracts between the privatized medical provider and
any hospital or non-hospital providers shall include, at least the following
terms reasonably and practicably consistent with those used by Idaho medic-
aid:
(a) Claims adjudication processing;
(b) Timing;
(c) Payment;
(d) Authorizations;
(e) Utilization review;
(f) Audit; and
(g) Appeals processes.
(2) For the purposes of sSubsection (1) of this section, the term
"provider of a medical service" shall include apply only to companies,
professional associations and other health care service entities whose ser-
vices are billed directly to the department of correction or any privatized
medical provider under contract with the department of correction. The term
"provider of a medical service" Subsection (1) of this section shall exclude
not apply to:
(a) Privatized correctional medical providers under contract with the
department of correction to provide health care to prison inmates;
(b) Private prison companies;
(c) Out-of-state correctional facilities contracting with the depart-
ment of correction to house prisoners;
(d) County jails; and
(e) Companies, professional associations and other health care service
entities whose services are provided within the terms of agreements
with privatized correctional medical providers under contract with the
department of correction, private prison companies and county jails.
SECTION 3. An emergency existing therefor, which emergency is hereby
declared to exist, this act shall be in full force and effect on and after its
passage and approval.