AN ACT
RELATING TO PUBLIC LIBRARIES; AMENDING SECTION 33-2741, IDAHO CODE, TO PRO-
VIDE THAT A PUBLIC LIBRARY'S INTERNET SAFETY POLICY SHALL APPLY TO ANY
PUBLICLY ACCESSIBLE WIRELESS INTERNET ACCESS PROVIDED BY THE LIBRARY
AND TO MAKE A TECHNICAL CORRECTION.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Idaho:
SECTION 1. That Section 33-2741, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
33-2741. PUBLIC LIBRARY -- INTERNET USE POLICY REQUIRED. (1) Public
libraries receiving public moneys and governed by the provisions of chapters
26 and 27, title 33, Idaho Code, that offer use of the internet or an online
service to the public:
(a) (i) Shall have in place a policy of internet safety for minors
including the operation of a technology protection measure with
respect to any publicly accessible wireless internet access or
publicly accessible computers with internet access and that pro-
tects against access through such computers or wireless internet
access to visual depictions that are obscene or child pornography
or harmful to minors; and
(ii) Shall enforce the operation of such technology protection
measure during any use of a computer or wireless internet access by
a minor.
(b) (i) Shall have in place a policy of internet safety, which may
include the operation of a technology protection measure with re-
spect to any publicly accessible wireless internet access or pub-
licly accessible computers with internet access and that protects
against access through such computers or wireless internet access
to visual depictions that are obscene or child pornography; and
(ii) May enforce the operation of such technology protection mea-
sure during any use of a computer or wireless internet access.
(2) The provisions of this section shall not prohibit a public library
from limiting internet access or otherwise protecting against materials
other than the materials specified in this section.
(3) An administrator, supervisor or other authorized representative of
a public library may disable a technology protection measure described in
subsection (1) of this section at the request of a library patron to enable
access for lawful purposes.
(4) Each public library's policy shall be developed under the direction
of the library's board of trustees, adopted in an open meeting and shall have
an effective date. The board of trustees shall review the policy at least
once every three (3) years. The policy shall reflect the most recent date of
review.
(5) Notice of the availability of the policy shall be posted in a con-
spicuous place within the library for all patrons to observe. The board of
trustees may issue any other public notice it considers appropriate to in-
form the community about the policy.
(6) The policy may:
(a) State that it restricts access to internet or online sites that con-
tain material described in subsection (1) of this section and how the
policy meets the requirements provided for in this section;
(b) Inform patrons that administrative procedures and guidelines for
library staff to follow in enforcing the policy have been adopted and
are available for review at the library; and
(c) Inform patrons that procedures for use by patrons and staff to han-
dle complaints about the policy, its enforcement or about observed pa-
tron behavior have been adopted and are available for review at the li-
brary.
(7) For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
(a) "Child pornography" means any visual depiction, including any pho-
tograph, film, video, picture, or computer or computer-generated im-
age or picture, whether made or produced by electronic, mechanical, or
other means, of sexually explicit conduct, where:
(i) The production of such visual depiction involves the use of a
minor engaging in sexually explicit conduct;
(ii) Such visual depiction is a digital image, computer image, or
computer-generated image that is, or is indistinguishable from,
that of a minor engaging in sexually explicit conduct; or
(iii) Such visual depiction has been created, adapted, or modified
to appear that an identifiable minor is engaging in sexually ex-
plicit conduct.
(b) "Harmful to minors" means any picture, image, graphic image file or
other visual depiction that:
(i)   Taken as a whole and with respect to minors, appeals to a
prurient interest in nudity, sex or excretion;
(ii) Depicts, describes or represents, in a patently offensive
way with respect to what is suitable for minors, an actual or sim-
ulated sexual act or sexual contact, actual or simulated normal or
perverted sexual acts, or a lewd exhibition of the genitals; and
(iii) Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, politi-
cal or scientific value as to minors.
(c) "Minor" means anyone who has not attained the age of eighteen (18)
years.
(d) "Obscene" means a depiction that:
(i)   The average person, applying contemporary community stan-
dards, would find to appeal to the prurient interest;
(ii) Depicts or describes sexual conduct in a patently offensive
way; and
(iii) Lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific
value.
(e) "Public moneys" means any and all moneys belonging to or collected
by the state or any political subdivision thereof including, but not
necessarily limited to, any city, county, town or district therein.
(8) The provisions of this section shall have no effect on the provi-
sions of section 33-132, Idaho Code.