AN ACT
RELATING TO SUSPENSION OF JUDGMENT AND SENTENCE; AMENDING SECTION 19-2601,
IDAHO CODE, TO PROVIDE THAT THE COURT MAY RETAIN JURISDICTION OVER CER-
TAIN PRISONERS FOR A CERTAIN PERIOD OF TIME.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Idaho:
SECTION 1. That Section 19-2601, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
19-2601. COMMUTATION, SUSPENSION, WITHHOLDING OF SENTENCE -- PRO-
BATION. Whenever any person shall have been convicted, or enter a plea of
guilty, in any district court of the state of Idaho, of or to any crime
against the laws of the state, except those of treason or murder, the court in
its discretion may:
1. Commute the sentence and confine the defendant in the county jail,
or, if the defendant is of proper age, commit the defendant to the custody of
the state department of juvenile corrections;
2. Suspend the execution of the judgment at the time of judgment or at
any time during the term of a sentence in the county jail and may place the
defendant on probation under such terms and conditions as it deems necessary
and appropriate;
3. Withhold judgment on such terms and for such time as it may prescribe
and may place the defendant on probation under such terms and conditions as
it deems necessary and appropriate; or
4. Suspend the execution of the judgment at any time during the first
three hundred sixty-five (365) days of a sentence to the custody of the state
board of correction. The court shall may retain jurisdiction over the pris-
oner for a period of up to the first three hundred sixty-five (365) days.
Except as provided for in section 19-2601A, Idaho Code, during the period of
retained jurisdiction, the state board of correction shall be responsible
for determining the placement of the prisoner and such education, program-
ming and treatment as it determines to be appropriate. The prisoner will
remain committed to the board of correction if not affirmatively placed on
probation by the court. In extraordinary circumstances, where the court
concludes that it is unable to obtain and evaluate the relevant information
within the period of retained jurisdiction, or where the court concludes
that a hearing is required and is unable to obtain the defendant's presence
for such a hearing within such period, the court may decide whether to place
the defendant on probation or release jurisdiction within a reasonable time,
not to exceed thirty (30) days, after the period of retained jurisdiction has
expired. Placement on probation shall be under such terms and conditions
as the court deems necessary and appropriate. The court in its discretion
may sentence a defendant to more than one (1) period of retained jurisdic-
tion after a defendant has been placed on probation in a case or following
release from commitment to the department of juvenile corrections pursuant
to section 19-2601A, Idaho Code. In no case shall the board of correction
or its agent, the department of correction, be required to hold a hearing
of any kind with respect to a recommendation to the court for the grant or
denial of probation. Probation is a matter left to the sound discretion of
the court. Any recommendation made by the state board of correction to the
court regarding the prisoner shall be in the nature of an addendum to the
presentence report. The board of correction and its agency, the department
of correction, and their employees shall not be held financially responsible
for damages, injunctive or declaratory relief for any recommendation made to
the district court under this section.
5. If the crime involved is a felony and if judgment is withheld as pro-
vided in subsection 3. of this section or if judgment and a sentence of cus-
tody to the state board of correction is suspended at the time of judgment in
accordance with subsection 2. of this section or as provided by subsection
4. of this section, the court may place the defendant on probation. If the
court places the defendant on probation to the board of correction, the court
shall include in the terms and conditions of probation a requirement that
the defendant enter into and comply with an agreement of supervision with the
board of correction. The agreement of supervision shall include provisions
setting forth the potential sanctions for a violation of the terms or condi-
tions imposed and potential rewards for compliance with the terms and con-
ditions imposed, as such sanctions and rewards are set forth in rules of the
board of correction.
6. If the crime involved is a misdemeanor, indictable or otherwise, or
if the court should suspend any remaining portion of a jail sentence already
commuted in accordance with subsection 1. of this section, the court, if it
grants probation, may place the defendant on probation.
7. The period of probation ordered by a court under this section under
a conviction or plea of guilty for a misdemeanor, indictable or otherwise,
may be for a period of not more than two (2) years; provided that the court
may extend the period of probation to include the period of time during which
the defendant is a participant in a problem solving court program and for a
period of up to one (1) year after a defendant's graduation or termination
from a problem solving court program. Under a conviction or plea of guilty
for a felony the period of probation may be for a period of not more than the
maximum period for which the defendant might have been imprisoned.