AN ACT
RELATING TO SCHOOL DISTRICTS; AMENDING SECTION 33-501, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE
PROVISIONS REGARDING SCHOOL DISTRICT BOARDS OF TRUSTEES; AMENDING SEC-
TION 33-503, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE PROVISIONS REGARDING THE ELECTION OF
SCHOOL DISTRICT TRUSTEES; AMENDING SECTION 33-505, IDAHO CODE, TO RE-
VISE A CERTAIN DATE AND TO MAKE TECHNICAL CORRECTIONS; AMENDING SECTION
33-506, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE PROVISIONS REGARDING THE ORGANIZATION
AND GOVERNMENT OF A SCHOOL DISTRICT BOARD OF TRUSTEES; AMENDING SECTION
33-510, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE A CERTAIN DATE AND TO MAKE TECHNICAL COR-
RECTIONS; AMENDING SECTION 33-801, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE A REFERENCE TO
A MEETING DATE; AND AMENDING SECTION 33-1003, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE A
MEETING DATE.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Idaho:
SECTION 1. That Section 33-501, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
33-501. BOARD OF TRUSTEES. (1) Each school district shall be governed
by a board of trustees. The board of trustees of each elementary school dis-
trict shall consist of three (3) members, and the board of trustees of each
other school district shall consist of five (5) members. Provided, however,
that the board of trustees of any district which has had a change in its dis-
trict boundaries subsequent to June 30, 1973, may consist of no fewer than
five (5) nor more than nine (9) members if such provisions are included as
part of an approved proposal to redefine and change trustee zones as provided
in section 33-313, Idaho Code. The board of trustees of any district that has
had a change in its district boundaries because of district consolidation on
and after January 1, 2008, shall consist of five (5) members if two (2) dis-
tricts consolidated or seven (7) members if three (3) or more districts con-
solidated. Commencing in 20118, a school district trustee shall be elected
for a term of four (4) years beginning at twelve o'clock noon on July January
1 next succeeding his election.
(2) Each trustee shall at the time of his nomination and election, or
appointment, be a school district elector of his district and a resident
of the trustee zone from which nominated and elected, or appointed. In the
event that a vacancy shall be declared as provided in section 33-504, Idaho
Code, and the board of trustees is unable to appoint a trustee from the zone
vacated after ninety (90) days, the board of trustees may appoint a person
at-large from within the boundaries of the school district to serve as the
trustee from the zone where the vacancy occurred.
(3) Each trustee shall qualify for and assume office on July January
1 next following his election, or, if appointed, at the regular meeting of
the board of trustees next following such appointment. At the first meeting
after a trustee assumes office, aAn oath of office shall be administered to
each the trustee, whether elected, reelected or appointed. Said oath may be
administered by the clerk, or by a another trustee, of the district, and the
records of the district shall show such oath of office to have been taken, and
by whom administered and shall be filed with the official records of the dis-
trict.
SECTION 2. That Section 33-503, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
33-503. ELECTION OF TRUSTEES -- UNIFORM DATE. (1) The election of
school district trustees including those in charter districts shall be on
the third Tuesday in May following the first Monday in November in odd-num-
bered years. Notice and conduct of the election, and the canvassing of the
returns shall be as provided in chapter 14, title 34, Idaho Code. In each
trustee zone, the person receiving the greatest number of votes cast within
his zone shall be declared by the board of trustees as the trustee elected
from that person's zone.
(2) If any two (2) or more persons residing in the same trustee zone have
an equal number of votes in any trustee zone and a greater number than any
other nominee residing in that zone, then the board of trustees shall deter-
mine the winner by a toss of a coin.
(3) The provisions of sections 67-6601 through 67-6616, Idaho Code, and
sections 67-6623 through 67-6630, Idaho Code, shall apply to all elections
of school district trustees, except for elections of trustees in a school
district that has fewer than five hundred (500) students. Provided however,
the county clerk shall stand in place of the secretary of state and the county
prosecutor shall stand in place of the attorney general. Any report or fil-
ing required to be filed by or for a candidate by such Idaho Code sections
shall be filed with the county clerk of the county wherein the district lies
or, in the case of a joint district, with the county clerk of the home county
as designated pursuant to section 33-304, Idaho Code.
(4) Incumbent trustees as of the effective date of this act shall have
their terms expire on January 1 following the November election of their suc-
cessors.
SECTION 3. That Section 33-505, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
33-505. BOARD OF TRUSTEES, DISTRICT NEWLY CREATED. (1) Within ten (10)
days after the entry of any order creating a new school district by the con-
solidation of districts or parts thereof, the trustees of all school dis-
tricts involved in the consolidation shall meet at the call of the state su-
perintendent of public instruction or his designee and, from their number,
shall select a board of trustees of the new district representing each of the
merged districts in an equal number to serve as follows: if two (2) districts
consolidated, one (1) member representing the board of trustees of each dis-
trict shall serve until the annual election of trustees next following; one
(1) member representing the board of trustees of each district shall serve
until the annual election the following year; and one (1) member appointed
by the other four (4) members shall serve until the annual election in the
year after that. If three (3) or more districts consolidated, three (3) mem-
bers shall serve until the annual election of trustees next following; three
(3) members shall serve until the annual election the following year; and
one (1) member appointed by the other six (6) members shall serve until the
annual election in the year after that. If the number of merged districts
is greater than three (3), the superintendent of public instruction shall
appoint as equally as possible from trustees of the previous districts so
that each district, if possible, has representation on the consolidated dis-
trict's board of trustees. The superintendent shall stagger the terms of
his appointments so that an equal number of appointees' terms expire annu-
ally and those trustees shall sit for election. Thereafter, all trustees who
are elected shall serve terms as provided in section 33-501, Idaho Code, for
a board of trustees of a school district. The board of trustees shall re-
port the names of said trustees to the state board of education. The board of
trustees of the newly consolidated school district shall expeditiously re-
draw the trustee zones pursuant to section 33-313, Idaho Code.
(2) The state board of education, at its first meeting next following
receipt of notice of the creation of new school districts by the division of
a district, shall appoint a board of trustees for each such new district, to
serve until July January 1 next following the next election for school dis-
trict trustees.
(3) Boards of trustees selected or appointed as in this section pro-
vided shall forthwith meet and organize as provided in section 33-506, Idaho
Code, and thereupon the board of trustees of any district, the whole of which
has been incorporated within the new district, or which was divided as the
case may be, shall be dissolved and its powers and duties shall cease. Prior
to the notice of annual election of trustees next following, the board of
trustees of each school district created by consolidation or by division of
districts shall determine by lot or by agreement from which of the trustee
zones the trustees therefor shall be elected. Thereafter each trustee shall
be elected for a term of four (4) years.
SECTION 4. That Section 33-506, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
33-506. ORGANIZATION AND GOVERNMENT OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES. (1) Each
board of school district trustees shall organize at its annual first regular
meeting after the January 1 directly following an election and elect a chair-
man, a vice-chairman, a clerk, and a treasurer. The clerk and the treasurer
may be members of the board of trustees; or, in the discretion of the board,
either or both may be selected from among competent and responsible persons
outside the membership of the board. The board in its discretion may allow
compensation for the clerk, and for the treasurer if other than the county
treasurer.
(2) Each member of the board not otherwise compensated by public moneys
shall be compensated for actual expenses incurred for travel to, from, and
attending meetings of the board. Such compensation shall be paid from the
district school funds.
(3) It shall be the duty of each member of the board of trustees to at-
tend all meetings, both regular and special; and the board shall have the
following powers and duties:
1.(a) To make by-laws, rules and regulations for its government and
that of the district, consistent with the laws of the state of Idaho and
the rules and regulations of the state board of education;
2.(b) To call special meetings or elections for such purpose as may be
necessary for the proper conduct and management of the school or schools
of the district;
3.(c) To employ an attorney or attorneys when deemed for the best in-
terests of the district, or for the purpose of defending the district
against any suit or for bringing action deemed necessary to be commenced
by the board.
SECTION 5. That Section 33-510, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
33-510. ANNUAL MEETINGS -- REGULAR MEETINGS -- BOARDS OF TRUSTEES. (1)
The annual meeting of each school district shall be on the date of its regu-
lar July January meeting in each year. Notice of the annual meeting of ele-
mentary school districts shall be given as provided in section 33-402, Idaho
Code, but one (1) publication shall suffice.
(2) Regular meetings of each board of school district trustees shall
be held monthly, on a uniform day of a uniform week as determined at the an-
nual meeting. Special meetings may be called by the chairman or by any two
(2) members of the board and held at any time. If the time and place of spe-
cial meetings shall not have been determined at a meeting of the board with
all members being present, then notice of the time and place shall be given
to each member and announced by written notice conspicuously posted at the
school district office and at least two (2) or more public buildings within
the school district not less than twenty-four (24) hours before such special
meeting is to be convened.
(3) A quorum for the transaction of business of the board of trustees
shall consist of a majority of the members of the board. Unless otherwise
provided by law, all questions shall be determined by a majority of the vote
cast. The chairman of the board may vote in all cases.
(4) All meetings shall conform to the provisions of chapter 2, title 74,
Idaho Code.
SECTION 6. That Section 33-801, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
33-801. SCHOOL DISTRICT BUDGET. No later than twenty-eight (28) days
or, if the conditions provided for in section 33-804(4), Idaho Code, have
been met, fourteen (14) days prior to its annual regular July meeting, the
board of trustees of each school district shall have prepared a budget, in
form prescribed by the state superintendent of public instruction, and shall
have called and caused to be held a public hearing thereon, and at such pub-
lic hearing, or at a special meeting held no later than fourteen (14) days af-
ter the public hearing, shall adopt a budget for the ensuing year. Notice of
the hearing shall be posted, and published as prescribed in section 33-402,
Idaho Code, and a record of the hearing shall be kept by the clerk of the board
of trustees. At the time said notice is given and until the date of the hear-
ing, a copy of the budget shall be available for public inspection at all rea-
sonable times at the administrative offices of the school district, or at the
office of the clerk of the district. The board of trustees of each school
district shall also prepare and publish, as a part of such notice, a summary
statement of the budget for the current and ensuing years. Such statement
shall be prepared in a manner consistent with standard accounting practices
and in such form as the state superintendent of public instruction shall pre-
scribe, and, among other things, said statement shall show amounts budgeted
for all major classifications of income and expenditures, with total amounts
budgeted for salary and wage expenditures in each such classification shown
separately. Such statement shall show amounts actually expended for the two
(2) previous years for the same classification for purposes of comparison.
The budgeted dollar amounts of revenue in those categories included within
the provisions of section 33-802, Idaho Code, as approved within the adopted
budget shall be the same as presented to the respective county commissioners
for tax levy purposes.
SECTION 7. That Section 33-1003, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
33-1003. SPECIAL APPLICATION OF EDUCATIONAL SUPPORT PROGRAM. (1) De-
crease in Average Daily Attendance. -- For any school district that has a
decrease in total average daily attendance of three percent (3%) or more of
its average daily attendance in the current school year from the total aver-
age daily attendance used for determining the allowance in the educational
support program for the prior school year, the allowance of funds from the
educational support program may be based on the average daily attendance
of the prior school year, less three percent (3%). When this provision is
applied, the decrease in average daily attendance shall be proportionately
distributed among the various categories of support units that are appropri-
ate for the district. After applying the provisions of this subsection, the
state department of education shall calculate the percentage of additional
statewide support units to total statewide support units and shall then re-
duce each school district's support units by this uniform percentage. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to public charter schools.
(2) Application of Support Program to Separate Schools/Attendance
Units in District.
(a) Separate Elementary School. -- Any separate elementary school
shall be allowed to participate in the educational support program as
though the school were the only elementary school operated by the dis-
trict.
(b) Hardship Elementary School. -- Upon application of the board of
trustees of a school district, the state board of education is empow-
ered to determine that a given elementary school or elementary schools
within the school district, not otherwise qualifying, are entitled
to be counted as a separate elementary school as defined in section
33-1001, Idaho Code, when, in the discretion of the state board of edu-
cation, special conditions exist warranting the retention of the school
as a separate attendance unit and the retention results in a substantial
increase in cost per pupil in average daily attendance above the average
cost per pupil in average daily attendance of the remainder of the dis-
trict's elementary grade school pupils. An elementary school operating
as a previously approved hardship elementary school shall continue to
be considered as a separate attendance unit, unless the hardship status
of the elementary school is rescinded by the state board of education.
(c) Separate Secondary School. -- Any separate secondary school shall
be allowed to participate in the educational support program as though
the school were the only secondary school operated by the district.
(d) Elementary/Secondary School Attendance Units. -- Elementary
grades in an elementary/secondary school will be funded as a separate
attendance unit if all elementary grades served are located more than
ten (10) miles distance by an all-weather road from both the nearest
like elementary grades within the same school district and from the lo-
cation of the office of the superintendent of schools of such district,
or from the office of the chief administrative officer of such district
if the district employs no superintendent of schools. Secondary grades
in an elementary/secondary school will be funded as a separate atten-
dance unit if all secondary grades served are located more than fifteen
(15) miles by an all-weather road from the nearest like secondary grades
operated by the district.
(e) Hardship Secondary School. -- Any district that operated two (2)
secondary schools separated by less than fifteen (15) miles, but which
district was created through consolidation subsequent to legislative
action pursuant to chapter 111, laws of 1947, and which school buildings
were constructed prior to 1935, shall be entitled to count the schools
as separate attendance units.
(f) Minimum Pupils Required. -- Any elementary school having less than
ten (10) pupils in average daily attendance shall not be allowed to par-
ticipate in the state or county support program unless the school has
been approved for operation by the state board of education.
(3) Remote Schools. -- The board of trustees of any Idaho school dis-
trict that operates and maintains a school that is remote and isolated from
the other schools of the state because of geographical or topographical
conditions may petition the state board of education to recognize and ap-
prove the school as a remote and necessary school. The petition shall be in
form and content approved by the state board of education and shall provide
such information as the state board of education may require. Petitions for
the recognition of a school as a remote and necessary school shall be filed
annually at least ninety (90) days prior to the date of the annual regular
June meeting of the board of trustees as established in section 33-510, Idaho
Code.
Within forty-five (45) days after the receipt of a petition for the
recognition of a remote and necessary school, the state board of education
shall either approve or disapprove the petition and notify the board of
trustees of its decision. Schools that the state board of education approves
as being necessary and remote shall be allowed adequate funding within the
support program for an acceptable educational program for the students of
the school. In the case of a remote and necessary secondary school, grades
7-12, the educational program shall be deemed acceptable when, in the opin-
ion of the state board of education, the accreditation standard relating to
staff size, established in accordance with the provisions of section 33-119,
Idaho Code, has been met. The final determination of an acceptable program
and adequate funding in the case of a remote and necessary elementary school
shall be made by the state board of education.
(4) Support Program When District Boundaries are Changed.
(a) In new districts formed by the division of a district, the support
program computed for the district, divided in its last year of opera-
tion, shall be apportioned to the new districts created by the division
in the proportion that the average daily attendance of pupils, elemen-
tary and secondary combined, residing in the area of each new district
so created, is to the average daily attendance of all pupils, elementary
and secondary combined, in the district divided in its last year of op-
eration before the division.
(b) When boundaries of districts are changed by excision or annexation
of territory, the support program of any district from which territory
is excised for the last year of operation before such excision shall be
divided, and apportioned among the districts involved, as prescribed in
paragraph (a) of this subsection.
(c) In new districts formed by consolidation of former districts after
January 1, 2007, the support program allowance, for a seven (7) year pe-
riod following the formation of the new district, shall not be less than
the combined support program allowances of the component districts in
the last year of operation before consolidation. After the expiration
of this period, the state department of education shall annually cal-
culate the number of support units that would have been generated had
the previous school districts not consolidated. All applicable state
funding to the consolidated district shall then be provided based on a
support unit number that is halfway between this figure and the actual
support units, provided that it cannot be less than the actual support
units.