AN ACT
RELATING TO ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS AND JOURNEYMEN; AMENDING SECTION
54-1019, IDAHO CODE, TO PROVIDE FOR MASTER ELECTRICIANS, TO REVISE THE
QUALIFICATIONS OF INSPECTORS AND TO MAKE A TECHNICAL CORRECTION.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Idaho:
SECTION 1. That Section 54-1019, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
54-1019. QUALIFICATIONS OF INSPECTORS. The administrator of the di-
vision of building safety shall appoint the number of deputy electrical
inspectors as may be required for the effective enforcement of the pro-
visions of this chapter. All inspectors shall be skilled in electrical
installations with not less than four (4) years of actual experience as a
journeyman or master electrician, shall possess certificates of competency
journeyman or master electrician licenses in the state of Idaho prior to
appointment, and shall be fully familiar with the provisions of this chapter
and rules made both by the administrator and the Idaho electrical board. No
inspector employed by the division of building safety and assigned to the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be engaged or finan-
cially interested in an electrical business, trade, practice or work, or
the sale of any supplies connected therewith, nor shall he act as an agent,
directly or indirectly, for any person, firm, copartnership, association
or corporation so engaged. Inspectors employed by municipalities electing
to claim exemption under this chapter must possess the qualifications set
forth in this section. Inspectors employed by the division of building
safety shall take and pass, before the end of their probationary period, the
a general inspector's test administered approved by the educational testing
service, or future tests developed by the educational testing service for
that purpose, or such examination developed for similar purposes, and ad-
ministered by another testing agency, which the Idaho electrical board may
select. Inspectors shall be required to participate in continuous education
training as directed by the Idaho electrical board and administered by the
division of building safety. The board may also promulgate rules relative to
the applicability of this provision to existing electrical inspectors with
permanent status in the division.