AN ACT
RELATING TO INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES; AMENDING SECTION 18-5811, IDAHO
CODE, TO REVISE PROVISIONS REGARDING CERTAIN CRIMES AGAINST INDIVIDU-
ALS WITH DISABILITIES; AMENDING SECTION 18-5811A, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE
PROVISIONS REGARDING UNLAWFUL USE OF AN ASSISTANCE DEVICE OR A SER-
VICE DOG; AMENDING SECTION 18-5812, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE PROVISIONS
REGARDING BATTERY TO INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES AND SERVICE DOGS;
AMENDING SECTION 18-5812A, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE PROVISIONS REGARDING
VIOLATION OF THE RIGHT TO BE ACCOMPANIED BY A SERVICE DOG; AMENDING SEC-
TION 18-5812B, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE PROVISIONS REGARDING VIOLATION OF
THE RIGHT TO BE ACCOMPANIED BY A SERVICE DOG-IN-TRAINING; AMENDING THE
HEADING FOR CHAPTER 7, TITLE 56, IDAHO CODE; AMENDING SECTION 56-701,
IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE PROVISIONS REGARDING STATE POLICY ON INDIVIDU-
ALS WITH DISABILITIES; AMENDING SECTION 56-701A, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE
DEFINITIONS; AMENDING SECTION 56-702, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE PROVISIONS
REGARDING THE USE OF PUBLIC PLACES BY INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES;
AMENDING SECTION 56-703, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE PROVISIONS REGARDING
FULL AND EQUAL ACCOMMODATION; AMENDING SECTION 56-704, IDAHO CODE, TO
REVISE PROVISIONS REGARDING THE RIGHT TO USE A SERVICE DOG; AMENDING
SECTION 56-704A, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE PROVISIONS REGARDING THE RIGHT
TO BE ACCOMPANIED BY A DOG-IN-TRAINING; AMENDING SECTION 56-705, IDAHO
CODE, TO REVISE PROVISIONS REGARDING CIVIL LIABILITY; AMENDING SECTION
56-706, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE TERMINOLOGY; AMENDING SECTION 56-707,
IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE PROVISIONS REGARDING THE RIGHT TO CERTAIN EMPLOY-
MENT; AMENDING SECTION 49-109, IDAHO CODE, TO REMOVE A DEFINITION; AND
AMENDING SECTION 49-706, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE PROVISIONS REGARDING
RIGHT-OF-WAY FOR CERTAIN PEDESTRIANS.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Idaho:
SECTION 1. That Section 18-5811, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
18-5811. ACTION REQUIRED TO AVOID ACCIDENT OR INJURY TO DISABLED
PERSON INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES -- PROHIBITED INTENTIONAL ACTIONS --
PENALTIES. (1) Any person, whether a pedestrian, operating a vehicle or
otherwise, who approaches an individual appearing to be a disabled person
an individual with a disability or lawfully using an assistance device or
assistance a service dog, and who:
(a) Intentionally Knowingly fails to stop, change course, speak or take
such other action as is necessary to avoid any accident or injury to the
disabled person individual with a disability, the assistance device or
the service dog, is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprison-
ment in the county jail not exceeding six (6) months, or by a fine of
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000), or by both.
(b) Intentionally Knowingly startles or frightens such person's dog,
is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in the county
jail not exceeding six (6) months, or by a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by
both.
(2) Any person who, without justification, intentionally knowingly in-
terferes with the use of an assistance a service dog or an assistance device
by obstructing, battering or intimidating the user or of the service dog or
the assistance device, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprison-
ment in the county jail not exceeding six (6) months, or by a fine of not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500), or by both.
SECTION 2. That Section 18-5811A, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
18-5811A. UNLAWFUL USE OF ASSISTANCE DEVICE OR SERVICE DOG. Any per-
son, not being a disabled person an individual with a disability or being
trained to assist disabled persons an individual with a disability, who uses
an assistance device or assistance a service dog in an attempt to gain treat-
ment or benefits as a disabled person an individual with a disability, is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 3. That Section 18-5812, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
18-5812. BATTERY TO DISABLED PERSONS AND ASSISTANCE SERVICE DOGS --
PENALTIES. (1) Any person who:
(a) Permits any animal which that is owned, harbored or controlled by
him to cause injury to or the death of any assistance service dog or dog-
in-training, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(b) Intentionally Knowingly causes injury to or the death of any
assistance service dog or dog-in-training is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding one (1)
year, or by a fine not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000), or by
both.
(2) In addition to any other criminal or civil penalties provided for
violation of this section, any person convicted under this section, regard-
less of the form of judgment, shall be ordered to make full restitution to
the owner or custodian of such dog for all veterinary bills, replacement and
other costs resulting from the injury or death of the dog.
SECTION 4. That Section 18-5812A, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
18-5812A.    DISABLED PERSONS INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES MAY BE
ACCOMPANIED BY ASSISTANCE SERVICE DOGS -- PENALTY FOR INTENTIONAL VIOLA-
TION. (1) A disabled person An individual with a disability shall not be
denied the use of any common carrier or public transportation facility or
admittance to any hotel, motel, cafe, elevator, housing for sale or rent, or
any other public place within the state of Idaho by reason of his being accom-
panied by an assistance a service dog. A disabled person An individual with
a disability shall be entitled to have an assistance a service dog with him
in such places and while using such facilities without being required to pay
any additional charges for his assistance service dog, but shall be liable
for any damage caused by his assistance service dog if the place or facility
normally charges persons for the damage they cause.
(2) Any person, firm, association or corporation or agent of any
person, firm, association or corporation intentionally violating the provi-
sions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 5. That Section 18-5812B, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
18-5812B. PERSON MAY BE ACCOMPANIED BY AN ASSISTANCE SERVICE DOG-IN-
TRAINING -- LIABILITY. (1) A person shall not be denied the use of any common
carrier or public transportation facility or admittance to any hotel, motel,
cafe, elevator, or any other public place within the state of Idaho by rea-
son of being accompanied by a dog-in-training. Such dog-in-training shall
be properly leashed so that the person may maintain control of the dog.
(2) Access to public places of public accommodation for dogs-in-train-
ing may be temporarily denied if the dog is poorly groomed so as to create a
health hazard, or the person accompanying the dog cannot maintain control of
the dog, the dog is a direct threat to the health or safety of others or the
dog is not housebroken.
(3) The person accompanying the dog-in-training shall be liable for
any damages, if the place or facility normally charges persons for the dam-
age they cause, or injuries caused by the dog, and any third-party owner,
lessor or manager of the public property shall in no way suffer liability for
damages or injuries caused by the dog-in-training. If the person accompany-
ing a dog-in-training is a minor, the parents of the child shall be liable.
SECTION 6. That the Heading for Chapter 7, Title 56, Idaho Code, be, and
the same is hereby amended to read as follows:
CHAPTER 7
RIGHTS OF THE BLIND AND PERSONS INDIVIDUALS WITH PHYSICAL DISABILITIES
SECTION 7. That Section 56-701, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
56-701. POLICY OF STATE. It is the policy of this state to encourage
and enable the blind, the visually impaired, the hearing impaired, and the
otherwise physically disabled individuals with disabilities to participate
fully in the social and economic life of the state and to engage in remunera-
tive employment.
SECTION 8. That Section 56-701A, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
56-701A. DEFINITIONS. As used in this chapter and chapter 58, title
18, Idaho Code:
(1) "Assistance device" means a cane or walking stick, predominantly
white or metallic in color, with or without red tip, or a manual or motorized
wheelchair or similar scooter, or other similar devices that enhance the
safety or mobility of a disabled person.
(2) "Assistance dog" means a dog that has been trained as a guide dog
for a blind or visually impaired person, a hearing dog for a hearing impaired
person, or a service dog for a physically disabled person.
(3) "Disabled person" means a hearing, visually or physically impaired
person.
(4) "Dog-in-training" means a dog being specifically trained to de-
velop social, environmental and other skills needed for admission to a
training school work or other program for assistance dogs to perform tasks
for individuals with disabilities. Dogs-in-training shall wear a jacket,
collar, scarf or other similar article identifying it as a dog-in-training.
(5) "Guide dog" means a dog that has been specially trained to aid a par-
ticular blind or visually impaired person.
(6) "Hearing dog" means a dog that has been specially trained to aid a
particular hearing impaired person.
(7) "Hearing impaired person" means a person who has a hearing impair-
ment manifested by a speech discrimination score of forty percent (40%) or
more in the better ear with appropriate correction as certified by a licensed
otologist, licensed audiologist, or the Idaho division of vocational reha-
bilitation.
(8) "Physically impaired person" means any person with any substantial
physical disability which prevents normal participation in community or
life activities as are available and participated in by persons with no such
afflictions or conditions of the same age and sex.
(3) "Dog trainer" means a person who trains dogs for individuals with
disabilities, whether the person is a professional trainer or a volunteer.
(4) "Individual with a disability" or "individuals with disabilities"
means a person who has or persons who have a disability as defined in 42
U.S.C. 12102 and 28 CFR parts 35 and 36.
(5) "Personal protection" means, in reference to a dog, guarding, bit-
ing or protecting on command, whether for sport or protection, beyond the
scope of being task-trained to mitigate a handler's disability.
(6) "Place of public accommodation" means a business, accommodation,
refreshment, entertainment, recreation or transportation facility of any
kind, whether licensed or not, at which goods, services, facilities, priv-
ileges, advantages or accommodations are extended, offered, sold or other-
wise made available to the public.
(7) "Puppy raiser" means a person who is specifically involved in de-
veloping the social, environmental and other skills needed by a dog to be-
come a dog-in-training for an individual with a disability. Puppy raisers
are volunteers and must be under the guidance of a dog trainer or a service
dog training organization.
(98) "Service dog" or "service animal" means a dog that has been spe-
cially is individually trained to aid a particular physically disabled
person with a physical disability other than sight or hearing impairment do
work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability,
including a physical, sensory, psychiatric, intellectual or other mental
disability. Other species of animals, whether wild or domestic, trained or
untrained, are not service animals for the purposes of this chapter. The
work or tasks performed by a service dog must be directly related to an indi-
vidual's disability. Such work or tasks may include, but are not limited to,
assisting individuals who are blind or who have low vision with navigation
and other tasks, alerting individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing to
the presence of people or sounds, providing nonviolent protection or res-
cue work, pulling a wheelchair, assisting an individual during a seizure,
alerting individuals to the presence of allergens, retrieving items such as
medicine or the telephone, providing physical support and assistance with
balance and stability to individuals with mobility disabilities, and help-
ing persons with psychiatric and neurological disabilities by preventing
or interrupting impulsive or destructive behaviors. The crime deterrent
effects of an animal's presence and the provision of emotional support,
well-being, comfort or companionship do not constitute work or tasks for the
purposes of this chapter. Dogs whose sole function is to provide comfort or
emotional support do not qualify as service dogs. Dogs who have been trained
in personal protection do not qualify as service dogs.
(10) "Visually impaired person" means any person who is blind, totally
blind, partially blind or otherwise visually impaired meaning such person
has central visual acuity not exceeding 20/200 in the better eye, with cor-
rected lenses, as measured by the Snellen test, or visual acuity greater than
20/200, but with a limitation in the field of vision such that the widest di-
ameter of the visual field subtends an angle not greater than twenty (20) de-
grees.
SECTION 9. That Section 56-702, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
56-702. RIGHT TO FULL AND FREE USE OF STREETS, HIGHWAYS, PUBLIC BUILD-
INGS AND PUBLIC FACILITIES. The blind, the visually impaired, the hearing
impaired, and the otherwise physically disabled Individuals with disabili-
ties have the same right as the able-bodied general public to the full and
free use of the streets, highways, sidewalks, walkways, public buildings,
public facilities, and other public places.
SECTION 10. That Section 56-703, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
56-703. RIGHT TO FULL AND EQUAL ACCOMMODATIONS IN ALL COMMON CARRI-
ERS, HOTELS, LODGING HOUSES, PLACES OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION OR OTHER PUBLIC
PLACES. (1) The blind, the visually impaired, the hearing impaired, and the
otherwise physically disabled Individuals with disabilities are entitled to
full and equal accommodations, advantages, facilities, and privileges of
all common carriers, airplanes, motor vehicles, and railroad trains, motor
buses, streetcars, boats or any other public conveyances or modes of trans-
portation, hotels, lodging places, places of public accommodations, amuse-
ment or resort, and other places to which the general public is invited, sub-
ject only to the conditions and limitations established by law and applica-
ble alike to all persons, and any place or entity to which this section ap-
plies shall permit the use of a service dog or a dog-in-training by an in-
dividual with a disability. No place or entity listed in this subsection
may ask or require an individual with a disability to pay a surcharge, even
if persons accompanied by pets are required to pay a surcharge, or to comply
with other requirements generally not applicable to persons without pets.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) of this section,
any place or entity to which this section applies may ask an individual with a
disability to remove a service dog or a dog-in-training from the premises if:
(a) The dog is out of control, and the dog's handler does not take effec-
tive action to reestablish control; or
(b) The dog is not housebroken.
(3) If a dog is removed pursuant to subsection (2) of this section, the
individual with a disability shall be afforded the opportunity to remain
without the dog and to participate in any service, program or activity being
offered.
(4) At all times, a service dog or dog-in-training shall be under the
control of its handler and shall have a harness, leash or other tether, un-
less the handler is unable, because of a disability, to use such harness,
leash or tether, or unless the use of a harness, leash or tether would in-
terfere with the dog's safe, effective performance of work or tasks, in which
case the dog must be under the handler's control through voice control, sig-
nals or other effective means.
(5) An owner, operator or employee of a place or an entity to which this
section applies shall not inquire as to the nature or extent of an individ-
ual's disability but may make certain inquiries to determine whether a dog
is a service dog. Valid inquiries are limited to whether the dog's presence
is required because of a disability and what work or task the dog has been
trained to perform. Documentation, such as proof that the animal has been
certified, trained or licensed as a service dog, may not be requested. No in-
quiry shall be made about a service dog if it is readily apparent that the dog
is trained to do work or perform tasks for an individual with a disability,
including guiding an individual who is blind or has low vision, pulling an
individual's wheelchair, or providing assistance with stability or balance
to an individual with an obvious mobility disability.
(6) A dog trainer or a puppy raiser shall have the same right of access
with a dog-in-training that an individual with a disability would have with
a service dog when accompanied by a properly identified dog-in-training for
purposes of training only. A dog-in-training shall be under the control of
its handler at all times and shall have a harness, leash or other tether, un-
less the handler is unable because of a disability, to use a harness, leash
or other tether or the use of a harness, leash or other tether would interfere
with the dog-in-training's safe, effective performance of work or tasks, in
which case the dog-in-training must be otherwise under the handler's control
through voice control, signals or other effective means.
(7) An owner, operator or employee of a place or an entity to which this
section applies shall not inquire as to the nature or extent of an individ-
ual's disability but may make certain inquiries to determine whether a dog
is a dog-in-training. Valid inquiries are limited to whether the dog's pres-
ence is required because the dog is being trained for an individual with a
disability and what work or task the dog is being trained to perform. Docu-
mentation, such as certification that the dog is a dog-in-training, may not
be requested. No inquiry shall be made about a dog-in-training if it is read-
ily apparent that the dog is being trained to do work or perform tasks for an
individual with a disability, including the tasks identified in subsection
(5) of this section.
SECTION 11. That Section 56-704, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
56-704. RIGHT TO USE OF ASSISTANCE SERVICE DOG -- LIABILITY. Every
disabled person individual with a disability shall have the right to be
accompanied by an assistance a service dog, in any of the places listed in
section 56-703, Idaho Code, without being required to pay an extra charge for
the assistance service dog; provided that he the individual shall be liable
for any damage done to the premises or facilities by his the service dog if
the place normally charges individuals for any damage they cause.
SECTION 12. That Section 56-704A, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
56-704A. RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DOGS-IN-TRAINING -- LIABILITY. (1)
Every person who is specially training or socializing a dog for the purpose
of being an assistance a service dog shall have the right to be accompanied
by the dog in any of the places listed in section 56-703, Idaho Code, without
being required to pay an extra charge for the dog if the accompaniment is part
of the dog's training or socialization to become an assistance a service dog.
The person accompanying the dog-in-training shall carry and upon request
display an identification card issued by a recognized school for assistance
dogs or organization which serves disabled persons be visually identifiable
as a dog-in-training as provided in section 56-701A(2), Idaho Code. The
person shall be fully liable for any damages done to the premises or facil-
ities by the dog if the premises or facilities normally charge persons for
any damage they cause, and no liability to other persons shall be attached
to the owner, lessor or manager of the property, arising out of activities
permitted by this chapter.
(2) For purposes of training only, dog trainers and puppy raisers shall
have the same rights of access with dogs-in-training as individuals with
disabilities when accompanied by a visually identifiable dog-in-training.
SECTION 13. That Section 56-705, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
56-705. CIVIL LIABILITY FOR INTENTIONAL VIOLATION OF STATUTES PRO-
TECTING DISABLED PERSONS INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES. Civil action may
be brought against any person intentionally violating the provisions of
section 18-5811, 18-5811A, 18-5812, or 18-5812A or 18-5812B, Idaho Code,
with judgment awarded upon proof of the elements to a preponderance of the
evidence. As a part of any such civil judgment, a successful plaintiff shall
be awarded punitive damages in an amount equal to all other damages suffered
by the plaintiff, but in no event less than five hundred dollars ($500). The
failure of a disabled person an individual with a disability to use an assis-
tance device or assistance a service dog shall not be held to constitute nor
be evidence of contributory negligence in any civil action.
SECTION 14. That Section 56-706, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
56-706. INTERFERENCE WITH RIGHTS OR ACTIVITIES -- PENALTY. Any per-
son or persons, firm or corporation, or the agent of any person or persons,
firm or corporation who denies or interferes with admittance to or enjoyment
of the public facilities enumerated in this chapter or otherwise interferes
with the rights of a totally or partially blind, hearing impaired, or oth-
erwise disabled person an individual with a disability under this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 15. That Section 56-707, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
56-707. RIGHT TO BE EMPLOYED IN EMPLOYMENT SUPPORTED IN WHOLE OR IN
PART BY PUBLIC FUNDS -- RESTRICTION -- USE OF SICK LEAVE. (1) The blind,
the visually impaired, the hearing impaired, and the otherwise disabled
Individuals with disabilities shall be employed in the state service, the
service of the political subdivisions of the state, in the public schools,
and in all other employment supported in whole or in part by public funds on
the same terms and conditions as the able-bodied, unless it is shown that the
particular disability prevents the performance of the work involved.
(2) Persons employed as provided in subsection (1) of this section, may
use accrued sick leave for the purpose of obtaining guide service dogs and
necessary training.
SECTION 16. That Section 49-109, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
49-109. DEFINITIONS -- H. (1) "Habitual violator" means any person who
has a driving record which shows a violation point count of eighteen (18) or
more points in any consecutive twenty-four (24) month period; or twenty-four
(24) or more points in any consecutive thirty-six (36) month period.
(2) "Hazardous material" means any material that has been designated as
hazardous under 49 U.S.C. section 5103, and is required to be placarded under
subpart F of 49 CFR part 172, or any quantity of material listed as a select
agent or toxin under 42 CFR part 73.
(3) "Hazardous waste" means a material that is subject to the hazardous
waste manifest requirements of the EPA due to the type and quantity of the ma-
terial, or which would be subject to these requirements absent an interim au-
thorization to the state under title 40, code of federal regulations or which
includes in whole or in part polychlorinated biphenyls which are regulated
by title 40, code of federal regulations, part 761.
(4)   "Hearing aid dog." (See "Hearing impaired person," section
56-701A, Idaho Code)
(5) "Highway" means the entire width between the boundary lines of ev-
ery way publicly maintained when any part is open to the use of the public
for vehicular travel, with jurisdiction extending to the adjacent property
line, including sidewalks, shoulders, berms and rights-of-way not intended
for motorized traffic. The term "street" is interchangeable with highway.
(a) Arterial. Any highway designated by the local authority as part of
a major arterial system of highways within its jurisdiction.
(b) Controlled-access. Any highway or roadway in respect to which own-
ers or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right
of access to or from the highway except at such points only or in such
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction
over the highway.
(c) Through. Any highway or portion of it on which vehicular traffic is
given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicu-
lar traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield the
right-of-way to vehicles on the through highway in obedience to a stop
sign, yield sign, or other traffic-control device.
SECTION 17. That Section 49-706, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
49-706. BLIND AND/OR HEARING IMPAIRED PEDESTRIAN WITH DISABILITY HAS
RIGHT-OF-WAY. (1) The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to
any blind pedestrian individual with a disability carrying a clearly visi-
ble white cane an assistance device or accompanied by a guide dog or a hearing
impaired person accompanied by a hearing aid service dog.
(2) For purposes of this section, "assistance device," "individual
with a disability" and "service dog" shall have the same meanings as provided
in section 56-701A, Idaho Code.