AN ACT
RELATING TO SPECIAL TAXES; AMENDING SECTION 31-3908, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE
THE AMOUNT OF SPECIAL TAX THAT MAY BE LEVIED BY BOARDS OF COUNTY COMMIS-
SIONERS FOR CERTAIN AMBULANCE SERVICE DISTRICTS.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Idaho:
SECTION 1. That Section 31-3908, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
31-3908. AMBULANCE DISTRICT AUTHORIZED. (1) The county commissioners
of any county shall, upon petition signed by not less than fifty (50) quali-
fied electors of said county, or any portion thereof, which may exclude in-
corporated cities, undertake the following procedure to determine the ad-
visability of resolving to establish and maintain an ambulance service dis-
trict within the county as may be designated in the petition.
(a) A petition to form an ambulance service district shall be presented
to the county clerk and recorder. The petition shall be signed by not
less than fifty (50) of the resident real property holders within the
proposed district. The petition shall designate the boundaries of the
district.
(b) The petition shall be filed with the county clerk and recorder of
the county in which the signers of the petition are located. Upon the
filing of the petition the county clerk shall examine the petition and
certify whether the required number of petitioners have signed the
petition. If the number of petition signers is sufficient, the clerk
shall transmit the petition to the board of county commissioners.
(c) Upon receipt of a duly certified petition the board of county com-
missioners shall cause the text of the petition to be published once a
week for at least three (3) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation within the county. With the publication of the petition
there shall be published a notice of the time of the meeting of the board
of county commissioners when the petition will be considered stating
that all persons interested may appear and be heard. No more than five
(5) names attached to the petition shall appear in the publication and
notice, but the number of signatures shall be stated.
At the time of filing the petition the sponsors thereof shall cause
to be deposited with the county clerk a sufficient sum of money to cover
the cost of publication of the petition and all necessary notices. If
the petition and notices are not published the deposit shall be returned
to whomever deposited the funds, and if there is any surplus remaining
after paying for the publication as herein provided it shall be returned
to the original depositors, and if a district is created the fees so ex-
pended are an obligation of the district and shall be repaid by the dis-
trict to the depositors.
(d) At the time set for hearing the petition, the board of county com-
missioners shall hear all persons who desire to be heard relative to the
creation of an ambulance service district. The board of county commis-
sioners may, if they so desire and it appears desirable, adjourn the
meeting for not to exceed thirty (30) days in time to further hear the
petitioners and protestants, if any. After the hearing or hearings, the
board of county commissioners shall adopt a resolution either creating
the proposed ambulance service district or denying the petition. When
the board of county commissioners creates an ambulance service district
the board shall adopt a resolution describing the boundaries of the dis-
trict.
(e) When the board of county commissioners adopts the resolution creat-
ing the ambulance service district, the board shall include in the res-
olution the name of the district, and file a copy of the order creat-
ing the district with the county clerk and recorder, for which the clerk
shall receive a fee of three dollars ($3.00).
(f) Procedures for annexation, deannexation, or dissolution of a dis-
trict created pursuant to this section shall be in substantial compli-
ance with the provisions for public notice and hearing provided herein,
and shall be by resolution adopted by the board of county commissioners.
(2) When the board of county commissioners has ordered the creation of
an ambulance service district, pursuant to the provisions of this section,
such district is hereby recognized as a legal taxing district, and providing
ambulance service is a governmental function.
(3) The board of county commissioners shall be the governing board of an
ambulance service district created pursuant to this section, and shall exer-
cise the duties and responsibilities provided in chapter 39, title 31, Idaho
Code.
(4) In any county where an ambulance service district is created as pro-
vided herein, the board of county commissioners is authorized to levy a spe-
cial tax, not to exceed four-hundredths percent (.04%) of market value for
assessment purposes, except as authorized by paragraph (a) of this subsec-
tion, upon all taxable property within the district for the purposes of the
district, but the levy otherwise authorized in section 31-3901, Idaho Code,
shall not be made on taxable property within the district.
Provided however, in any county where market value for assessment purposes
is five hundred million dollars ($500,000,000) or less, and an ambulance
service district is created as provided herein, the board of county commis-
sioners is authorized to levy a special tax, not to exceed six-hundredths
percent (.06%) of market value for assessment purposes, except as authorized
by paragraph (a) of this subsection, upon all taxable property within the
district for the purposes of the district, but the levy otherwise autho-
rized in section 31-3901, Idaho Code, shall not be made on taxable property
within the district. In the event the board of county commissioners levies
a special tax of up to six-hundredths percent (.06%) of market value for as-
sessment purposes as provided herein, it shall not be authorized to levy any
additional special tax over and above that amount.
(a) In any county where an ambulance service district:
(i) Was created as of January 1, 1976,
(ii) Had at the time of its creation a market value for assessment
purposes of the district of less than three hundred million dol-
lars ($300,000,000), and
(iii) The service provided by the district is an advanced life sup-
port paramedic unit,
the board of county commissioners may submit to the electors within the
district the question of whether the levy authorized in subsection (4)
of this section may be increased to a levy not to exceed six-hundredths
percent (.06%) of market value for assessment purposes upon all taxable
property within the district for the purposes of the district, if ap-
proved by a minimum of two-thirds (2/3) of the qualified electors of the
district voting at an election called for that purpose and held on the
May or November dates provided in section 34-106, Idaho Code, but the
levy otherwise authorized in section 31-3901, Idaho Code, shall not be
made on taxable property within the district.
(5) The board of county commissioners is authorized by resolution to
create an ambulance district capital improvement account. The board may
dedicate all or a portion of the fees and taxes collected pursuant to this
chapter to the capital improvement account for the purpose of purchasing
necessary buildings, land or equipment for the operation of the district.
The board is further authorized to carry over and add to the funds in the
account from year to year in order to make the purchases authorized by this
subsection.
(6) As used in this chapter, "ambulance district" or "ambulance service
district" means a political subdivision formed to provide ambulance trans-
port, emergency medical services as defined in section 56-1012, Idaho Code,
community health emergency medical services as defined in section 56-1012,
Idaho Code, and/or other activities necessary to meet the community health
needs of the district.