AN ACT
RELATING TO MOTOR VEHICLES; REPEALING SECTION 49-1401A, IDAHO CODE, RELAT-
ING TO TEXTING WHILE DRIVING; AND AMENDING CHAPTER 14, TITLE 49, IDAHO
CODE, BY THE ADDITION OF A NEW SECTION 49-1401A, IDAHO CODE, TO DEFINE
TERMS, TO PROHIBIT PERSONS FROM OPERATING A MOTOR VEHICLE WHILE USING
A MOBILE ELECTRONIC DEVICE, TO PROVIDE EXCEPTIONS, TO PROHIBIT PERSONS
FROM OPERATING A MOTOR VEHICLE WHILE WEARING EARPHONES, TO PROHIBIT
CERTAIN ACTIONS REGARDING SOCIAL NETWORKING SITES, TO PROHIBIT CERTAIN
ACTIONS REGARDING PERSONS OPERATING A SCHOOL BUS, TO PROVIDE PENALTIES
AND TO PROVIDE THAT LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS MAY TAKE CERTAIN ACTIONS.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Idaho:
SECTION 1. That Section 49-1401A, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
repealed.
SECTION 2. That Chapter 14, Title 49, Idaho Code, be, and the same is
hereby amended by the addition thereto of a NEW SECTION, to be known and des-
ignated as Section 49-1401A, Idaho Code, and to read as follows:
49-1401A. DISTRACTED DRIVING. (1) As used in this section:
(a) "Mobile electronic device" means any handheld or portable elec-
tronic device capable of providing wireless data or voice communication
between two (2) or more persons or for amusement, including a cellular
telephone; broadband personal communication device; two-way messag-
ing device; text messaging device; pager; electronic device that can
receive or transmit text or character-based images, access or store
data or connect to the internet; personal digital assistant; laptop
computer; computer tablet; stand-alone computer; portable computing
device; mobile device with a touchscreen display that is designed to be
worn; electronic games; equipment that is capable of playing a video,
taking photographs, capturing images or recording or transmitting
video; and any similar device that is readily removable from a vehicle
and is used to write, send or read text or data or capture images or video
through manual input. "Mobile electronic device" does not include a ra-
dio designed for the citizens band service or the amateur radio service
of the federal communications commission or a commercial two-way radio
communications device.
(b) "Operate" means to drive or assume physical control of a motor ve-
hicle in motion upon a public way, street, road or highway. "Operate"
does not include a motor vehicle that is lawfully parked or an automated
vehicle with an SAE level 5 automated driving system performing dynamic
driving tasks in automated mode as referenced in SAE international
standard J3016 (2014).
(c) "Social networking site" means any web-based service that allows
individuals to construct a profile within a founded system and communi-
cate with other users of the site.
(2) Except as provided in this subsection, a person shall not operate a
motor vehicle while using a mobile electronic device. The provisions of this
subsection shall not apply to:
(a) A law enforcement officer, firefighter, emergency medical techni-
cian, paramedic, operator of an authorized emergency vehicle or sim-
ilarly engaged paid or volunteer public safety first responder during
the performance of that person's official duties, and a public utility
employee or contractor acting within the scope of that person's employ-
ment when responding to a public utility emergency;
(b) The use of a mobile electronic device for emergency purposes, in-
cluding a text messaging device to contact a 911 system, an emergency
call to a law enforcement agency, health care provider, fire department
or other emergency services agency or entity; reporting a fire, traffic
accident, serious road hazard or medical or hazardous materials emer-
gency to appropriate authorities; reporting the operator of another mo-
tor vehicle who is driving in a reckless or otherwise unsafe manner or
who appears to be driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs; or re-
porting a crime;
(c) The use of a global positioning or navigation system feature of a
mobile electronic device, provided that the operator of the vehicle is
not manually entering information into the global positioning or navi-
gation system feature of the device;
(d) Reading, selecting or entering a telephone number or name in a mo-
bile electronic device for the purpose of making or receiving a tele-
phone call or if a person otherwise activates or deactivates a feature
or function of a mobile electronic device;
(e) The use of a mobile electronic device in a voice-operated or hands-
free mode if the operator of the motor vehicle does not use his hands to
operate the device, except to activate or deactivate a feature or func-
tion of the device; or
(f) The use of a mobile electronic device by a governmental or commer-
cial user as long as the mobile electronic device is being used in a sim-
ilar manner as a commercial two-way radio communication device.
(3) No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing headphones or
earphones in both ears simultaneously for the purposes of listening to mu-
sic, video or other sound broadcasts.
(4) No person shall access, read or post to a social networking site
while operating a motor vehicle.
(5) No person shall operate a school bus that is transporting one (1) or
more children while using a mobile electronic device, except for emergency
purposes as provided in subsection (2)(b) of this section.
(6) A violation of this section shall be a moving violation and shall be
an infraction punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100). For each
subsequent offense, the offender shall be punished by a fine of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250).
(7) If a person is involved in an accident at the time of the violation
of this section, the fine shall be double the amount of the fine imposed under
subsection (6) of this section, and the law enforcement officer investigat-
ing the accident shall indicate in any written accident report that the per-
son was using a mobile electronic device at the time of the accident.
(8) A court may suspend a person's driver's license for up to ninety
(90) days if the person has three (3) or more convictions for violations of
this section within a three (3) year period.
(9) A law enforcement officer enforcing the provisions of this section
may treat a violation of this section as the primary or sole reason for issu-
ing a citation to a driver.