AN ACT
RELATING TO INSURANCE; AMENDING SECTION 41-1849, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE
PROVISIONS REGARDING CONTRACTS WITH PROVIDERS OF DENTAL SERVICES; AND
AMENDING SECTION 41-3444, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE PROVISIONS REGARDING
CONTRACTS WITH PROVIDERS OF DENTAL SERVICES.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Idaho:
SECTION 1. That Section 41-1849, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
41-1849. CONTRACTS WITH PROVIDERS OF DENTAL SERVICES. (1) No person
contracting with dentists to provide coverage or reimbursement for den-
tal services rendered by the dentist to covered persons may require, as an
element of any dental care provider participation contract, that any the
provider agree to adopt fees set by the person for dental care services that
are not covered services under the contract.
(2) "Covered services" as used in this section means dental care
services under the applicable dental plan, dental plan contract or plan
benefits subject to such contractual limitations on benefits of the dental
plan, dental plan contracts or plan benefits as may apply for which payment
is available to the covered person or dentist under the covered person's
plan or contract, or for which payment to the covered person or to the den-
tist would be available but for the application of contractual limitations
on reimbursement, such as deductibles, copayments, coinsurance, waiting
periods, annual or lifetime maximums, frequency limitations, alternative
benefit payments or other similar contractual limitations.
(2) This section shall apply to any contract with providers for dental
services that is issued after January 1, 2011. Contracts that are in exis-
tence on January 1, 2011, shall be brought into compliance on the next an-
niversary date, renewal date, or the expiration date of the applicable col-
lective bargaining contract, if any, whichever date is latest.
SECTION 2. That Section 41-3444, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
41-3444. CONTRACTS WITH PROVIDERS OF DENTAL SERVICES. (1) No person
contracting with dentists to provide coverage or reimbursement for dental
services professional service corporation providing dental health care ser-
vices to subscribers through participating licensed dentists may require,
as an element of any dental care provider participation contract, that any
provider agree to adopt fees set by the person for services that are not cov-
ered services under the contract the service agreement between the profes-
sional service corporation and the participating licensed dentist, that the
participating licensed dentist agree to be compensated in accordance with a
formula or fee schedule adopted by the professional service corporation for
services rendered to the subscriber that are not covered services pursuant
to the subscriber's contract or certificate.
(2) "Covered services" as used in this section means dental care ser-
vices under the applicable dental plan, dental plan contract or plan bene-
fits subject to such contractual limitations on benefits of the dental plan,
dental plan contracts or plan benefits as may apply for which compensation
by the professional service corporation to the subscriber or to the partic-
ipating licensed dentist is available under a covered person's plan or con-
tract, or for which compensation by the professional service corporation to
the subscriber or to the participating licensed dentist would be available
but for the application of contractual limitations on compensation, such as
deductibles, copayments, coinsurance, waiting periods, annual or lifetime
maximums, frequency limitations, alternative benefit payments or other sim-
ilar contractual limitations.
(2) This section shall apply to any contract with providers for dental
services that is issued after January 1, 2011. Contracts that are in exis-
tence on January 1, 2011, shall be brought into compliance on the next an-
niversary date, renewal date, or the expiration date of the applicable col-
lective bargaining contract, if any, whichever date is latest.