AN ACT
RELATING TO JUDICIAL REVIEW; AMENDING SECTION 31-1506, IDAHO CODE, TO RE-
VISE PROVISIONS REGARDING JUDICIAL REVIEW OF DECISIONS OF BOARDS OF
COUNTY COMMISSIONERS AND TO SPECIFY PROCEDURAL PROVISIONS; AMEND-
ING SECTION 31-3411, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE A CODE REFERENCE; AMENDING
SECTION 67-6519, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE A CODE REFERENCE; AMENDING SEC-
TION 67-6520, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE A CODE REFERENCE; AMENDING SECTION
67-6521, IDAHO CODE, TO SPECIFY PROCEDURAL PROVISIONS REGARDING JUDI-
CIAL REVIEW OF CERTAIN LOCAL GOVERNMENT DECISIONS; AND AMENDING SECTION
67-6535, IDAHO CODE, TO REVISE A CODE REFERENCE AND TO MAKE TECHNICAL
CORRECTIONS.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Idaho:
SECTION 1. That Section 31-1506, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
31-1506. JUDICIAL REVIEW OF BOARD DECISIONS. (1) Unless otherwise
provided by law, judicial review of any final act, order or proceeding of the
board as provided in chapter 52, title 67, Idaho Code, shall be initiated by
any person aggrieved thereby within the same time and in the same manner as
provided in chapter 52, title 67, Idaho Code, for judicial review of actions
twenty-eight (28) days after the date of the written decision of the final
act, order or proceeding.
(2) The board shall keep a record.
(3) The court shall not substitute its judgment for that of the board as
to the weight of the evidence on questions of fact.
(4) Review by the court shall be conducted without a jury and shall be
confined to the board's record.
(5) The court shall affirm the board's decision unless the court finds
the decision, and any findings, inferences and conclusions were:
(a) In violation of constitutional or statutory provisions;
(b) In excess of the statutory authority of the board;
(c) Made upon unlawful procedure; or
(d) Arbitrary, capricious or an abuse of discretion.
If the board's decision is not affirmed, it shall be set aside, in whole or in
part, and remanded for further proceedings as necessary.
(6) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (5) of this section,
a board's decision shall be affirmed unless substantial rights of the appel-
lant have been prejudiced.
(7) A person is not entitled to judicial review of a board decision un-
til that person has exhausted all administrative remedies required.
(8) The filing of the petition for review does not itself stay the ef-
fectiveness or enforcement of the board decision. The board may grant, or
the reviewing court may order, a stay upon appropriate terms.
(9) Venue for judicial review of final board actions shall be in the
district court of the county governed by the board.
SECTION 2. That Section 31-3411, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
31-3411. NOTICE OF APPEAL. The applicant has the right to appeal the
decision of the board. Such appeal shall be filed with the clerk of the
board, in writing, within thirty (30) days of the date of the board's denial.
If the appeal is denied by the board, the applicant shall be entitled to judi-
cial review of the appeal decision of the board, by filing a complaint with
the district court within thirty (30) days of the date of the final written
decision of the board. Proceedings under this chapter shall be conducted
in substantially the same manner provided in the administrative procedures
act, chapter 52, title 67, section 31-1506, Idaho Code.
SECTION 3. That Section 67-6519, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
67-6519. APPLICATION GRANTING PROCESS. (1) As part of ordinances re-
quired or authorized under this chapter, a procedure shall be established
for processing in a timely manner applications for zoning changes, subdivi-
sions, variances, special use permits and such other applications required
or authorized pursuant to this chapter for which a reasonable fee may be
charged.
(2) Where the commission hears an application, the commission shall
have a reasonable time fixed by the governing board to examine the applica-
tion before the commission makes its decision on the application or makes
its recommendation to the governing board. Each commission or governing
board shall establish by rule a time period within which a recommendation
or decision must be made. Provided however, any application which relates
to a public school facility shall receive priority consideration and shall
be reviewed for approval, denial or recommendation by the commission or the
governing board at the earliest reasonable time, regardless of the timing
of its submission relative to other applications which are not related to
public school facilities.
(3) When considering an application which relates to a public school
facility, the commission shall specifically review the application for the
effect it will have on increased vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian volumes
on adjacent roads and highways. To ensure that the state highway system or
the local highway system can satisfactorily accommodate the proposed school
project, the commission shall request the assistance of the Idaho trans-
portation department if state highways are affected, or the local highway
district with jurisdiction if the affected roads are not state highways. The
Idaho transportation department, the appropriate local highway jurisdic-
tion, or both as determined by the commission, shall review the application
and shall report to the commission on the following issues as appropri-
ate: the land use master plan; school bus plan; access safety; pedestrian
plan; crossing guard plan; barriers between highways and school; location
of school zone; need for flashing beacon; need for traffic control sig-
nal; anticipated future improvements; speed on adjacent highways; traffic
volumes on adjacent highways; effect upon the highway's level of service;
need for acceleration or deceleration lanes; internal traffic circula-
tion; anticipated development on surrounding undeveloped parcels; zoning
in the vicinity; access control on adjacent highways; required striping
and signing modifications; funding of highway improvements to accommodate
development; proposed highway projects in the vicinity; and any other issues
as may be considered appropriate to the particular application.
(4) Whenever a governing board or zoning or planning and zoning commis-
sion grants or denies an application, it shall specify:
(a) The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
(b) The reasons for approval or denial; and
(c) The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain ap-
proval.
Every final decision rendered shall provide or be accompanied by notice
to the applicant regarding the applicant's right to request a regulatory
taking analysis pursuant to section 67-8003, Idaho Code. An applicant de-
nied an application or aggrieved by a final decision concerning matters
identified in section 67-6521(1)(a), Idaho Code, may within twenty-eight
(28) days after all remedies have been exhausted under local ordinance seek
judicial review under the procedures provided by this chapter 52, title 67,
Idaho Code.
SECTION 4. That Section 67-6520, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
67-6520. HEARING EXAMINERS. (1) Hearing examiners include profes-
sionally trained or licensed staff planners, attorneys, engineers, or
architects. If authorized by local ordinance adopted, amended, or repealed
in accordance with the notice and hearing procedures provided in section
67-6509, Idaho Code, hearing examiners may be appointed by a governing board
or zoning or planning and zoning commission for hearing applications for
subdivisions, special use permits, variances and requests for rezoning
which are in accordance with the plan. Notice, hearing, and records before
the examiner shall be as provided in this chapter for the zoning or planning
and zoning commission. Whenever a hearing examiner hears an application, he
may, pursuant to local ordinance, grant or deny the application or submit a
recommendation to the governing board or zoning or planning and zoning com-
mission. His decision or recommendation shall specify:
(a) The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
(b) The reasons for the recommendation or decision; and
(c) The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain an ap-
proval.
(2) Every final decision shall provide or be accompanied by notice to
the applicant regarding the applicant's right to request a regulatory taking
analysis pursuant to section 67-8003, Idaho Code. An applicant denied an ap-
plication or aggrieved by a final decision concerning matters identified in
section 67-6521(1)(a), Idaho Code, may within twenty-eight (28) days after
all appellate remedies have been exhausted under local ordinance seek judi-
cial review as provided by this chapter 52, title 67, Idaho Code.
SECTION 5. That Section 67-6521, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
67-6521. ACTIONS BY AFFECTED PERSONS.
(1) (a) As used herein, an affected person shall mean one having a bona
fide interest in real property which may be adversely affected by:
(i) The approval, denial or failure to act upon an application for
a subdivision, variance, special use permit and such other similar
applications required or authorized pursuant to this chapter;
(ii) The approval of an ordinance first establishing a zoning dis-
trict upon annexation or the approval or denial of an application
to change the zoning district applicable to specific parcels or
sites pursuant to section 67-6511, Idaho Code; or
(iii) An approval or denial of an application for conditional re-
zoning pursuant to section 67-6511A, Idaho Code.
(b) Any affected person may at any time prior to final action on an
application required or authorized under this chapter, if no hearing
has been held on the application, petition the commission or governing
board in writing to hold a hearing pursuant to section 67-6512, Idaho
Code; provided however, that if twenty (20) affected persons petition
for a hearing, the hearing shall be held.
(c) After a hearing, the commission or governing board may:
(i) Grant or deny an application; or
(ii) Delay such a decision for a definite period of time for fur-
ther study or hearing. Each commission or governing board shall
establish by ordinance or resolution a time period within which a
recommendation or decision must be made.
(d) Every final decision rendered shall provide or be accompanied by
notice to the applicant regarding the applicant's right to request a
regulatory taking analysis pursuant to section 67-8003, Idaho Code. An
affected person aggrieved by a final decision concerning matters iden-
tified in section 67-6521(1)(a), Idaho Code, may within twenty-eight
(28) days after all remedies have been exhausted under local ordinances
seek judicial review as provided by chapter 52, title 67, Idaho Code,
and:
(i) The court shall not substitute its judgment for that of the
local government as to the weight of the evidence on questions of
fact.
(ii) The local government shall base its final decision solely
on the record, and the court shall affirm the local government's
decision unless the court finds that the local government's deci-
sion, findings, inferences and conclusions were:
1. In violation of constitutional or statutory provisions;
2. In excess of the statutory authority of the board;
3. Made upon unlawful procedure; or
4. Arbitrary, capricious or an abuse of discretion.
If the local government's decision is not affirmed, it shall be set
aside, in whole or in part, and remanded for further proceedings as
necessary.
(iii) Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph (ii) of this
paragraph, local government decisions shall be affirmed unless
substantial rights of the appellant have been prejudiced.
(iv) A person is not entitled to judicial review of a local govern-
ment decision until that person has exhausted all administrative
remedies required.
(v) The filing of the petition for review does not itself stay the
effectiveness or enforcement of the local government decision.
The local government may grant, or the reviewing court may order, a
stay upon appropriate terms.
(vi) Venue for judicial review of final board decisions shall be
in the district court of the county governed by the board.
(2) (a) Authority to exercise the regulatory power of zoning in land
use planning shall not simultaneously displace coexisting eminent do-
main authority granted under section 14, article I, of the constitution
of the state of Idaho and chapter 7, title 7, Idaho Code.
(b) An affected person claiming "just compensation" for a perceived
"taking," the basis of the claim being that a final action restricting
private property development is actually a regulatory action by local
government deemed "necessary to complete the development of the mate-
rial resources of the state," or necessary for other public uses, may
seek a judicial determination of whether the claim comes within de-
fined provisions of section 14, article I, of the constitution of the
state of Idaho relating to eminent domain. Under these circumstances,
the affected person is exempt from the provisions of subsection (1) of
this section and may seek judicial review through an inverse condem-
nation action specifying neglect by local government to provide "just
compensation" under the provisions of section 14, article I, of the con-
stitution of the state of Idaho and chapter 7, title 7, Idaho Code.
SECTION 6. That Section 67-6535, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
67-6535. APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF ANY APPLICATION TO BE BASED UPON EX-
PRESS STANDARDS AND TO BE IN WRITING. (1) The approval or denial of any
application required or authorized pursuant to this chapter shall be based
upon standards and criteria which shall be set forth in the comprehensive
plan, zoning ordinance or other appropriate ordinance or regulation of the
city or county. Such approval standards and criteria shall be set forth in
express terms in land use ordinances in order that permit applicants, in-
terested residents and decision-makers alike may know the express standards
that must be met in order to obtain a requested permit or approval. Whenever
the nature of any decision standard or criterion allows, the decision shall
identify aspects of compliance or noncompliance with relevant approval
standards and criteria in the written decision.
(2) The approval or denial of any application required or authorized
pursuant to this chapter shall be in writing and accompanied by a reasoned
statement that explains the criteria and standards considered relevant,
states the relevant contested facts relied upon, and explains the rationale
for the decision based on the applicable provisions of the comprehensive
plan, relevant ordinance and statutory provisions, pertinent constitu-
tional principles and factual information contained in the record.
(a) Failure to identify the nature of compliance or noncompliance with
express approval standards or failure to explain compliance or noncom-
pliance with relevant decision criteria shall be grounds for invalida-
tion of an approved permit or site-specific authorization, or denial of
same, on appeal.
(b) Any applicant or affected person seeking judicial review of com-
pliance with the provisions of this section must first seek reconsid-
eration of the final decision within fourteen (14) days. Such written
request must identify specific deficiencies in the decision for which
reconsideration is sought. Upon reconsideration, the decision may be
affirmed, reversed or modified after compliance with applicable pro-
cedural standards. A written decision shall be provided to the appli-
cant or affected person within sixty (60) days of receipt of the request
for reconsideration or the request is deemed denied. A decision shall
not be deemed final for purposes of judicial review unless the process
required in this subsection has been followed. The twenty-eight (28)
day time frame for seeking judicial review is tolled until the date of
the written decision regarding reconsideration or the expiration of the
sixty (60) day reconsideration period, whichever occurs first.
(3) It is the intent of the legislature that decisions made pursuant to
this chapter should be founded upon sound reason and practical application
of recognized principles of law. In reviewing such decisions, the courts of
the state are directed to consider the proceedings as a whole and to evaluate
the adequacy of procedures and resultant decisions in light of practical
considerations with an emphasis on fundamental fairness and the essentials
of reasoned decision-making. Only those whose challenge to a decision
demonstrates actual harm or violation of fundamental rights, not the mere
possibility thereof, shall be entitled to a remedy or reversal of a decision.
Every final decision rendered concerning a site-specific land use request
shall provide or be accompanied by notice to the applicant regarding the
applicant's right to request a regulatory taking analysis pursuant to sec-
tion 67-8003, Idaho Code. An applicant denied an application or aggrieved
by a final decision concerning matters identified in section 67-6521(1)(a),
Idaho Code, may, within twenty-eight (28) days after all remedies have been
exhausted under local ordinance, seek judicial review under the procedures
provided by this chapter 52, title 67, Idaho Code. An appeal shall be from
the final decision and not limited to issues raised in the request for recon-
sideration.