AN ACT
RELATING TO PLUMBING AND PLUMBERS; AMENDING SECTION 54-2602, IDAHO CODE, TO
REVISE CERTAIN EXCEPTIONS FOR A CERTIFICATE OF COMPETENCY REQUIREMENT.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Idaho:
SECTION 1. That Section 54-2602, Idaho Code, be, and the same is hereby
amended to read as follows:
54-2602. EXCEPTIONS. (1) Certificate of competency requirements of
this chapter shall not be deemed to apply to:
(a) Any person who does property owner performing plumbing work in a
single the owner's primary or duplex secondary residence. This excep-
tion is limited to one (1) or two (2) family dwelling, including units
and includes accessory buildings, quarters and grounds in connection
with such dwellings; provided that such person owns or is a contract
purchaser of the premises, and provided further that such person used
for noncommercial purposes. The property owner shall comply with the
minimum standards and rules applicable to plumbing practices provided
by this chapter.
(b) Farm buildings located outside the incorporated limits of any city
unless such buildings are connected to a public water or sewer system;
and a farm building is hereby defined to be a structure located on agri-
cultural zoned property and designed and constructed to house farm im-
plements, hay, grain, poultry, livestock or other horticultural prod-
ucts and includes sheds, barns, corrals or fences. This definition does
not include a place for human habitation or a place of regular employ-
ment where agricultural products are extracted, processed, treated or
packaged; a place used by the public; or conditioned livestock housing.
(c) Logging, mining or construction camps when plumbing installations
are made to conform with the recommendations of the department of health
and welfare.
(d) Piping systems in industrial processing plants located outside the
incorporated limits of any city unless such systems are connected to a
public water or sewer system.
(e) Maintenance wWork on plumbing systems on premises owned or oper-
ated by an employer who regularly employs maintenance or construction
plumbers, provided that alterations, extensions and new construction
personnel. All work shall comply with the minimum standards, codes and
rules applicable to plumbing practices installations provided by this
chapter.
(f) Nothing contained in this section or any other provision of this
code shall be construed or applied to require a sewer contractor, sewage
disposal contractor, or any excavating or utility contractor who gener-
ally engages in the business of installing, altering or repairing sew-
ers, private and public sewage disposal systems, and water distribu-
tion and/or drainage lines outside the foundation walls of any build-
ing or structure, to obtain a valid contractor's certificate of compe-
tency or to employ only journeymen plumbers possessing a valid journey-
man plumber's certificate of competency or registration, or to in any
way require that his employees be registered, licensed or declared com-
petent by the board.
(g) Water treatment installations and repairs when installed in res-
idential or business properties, provided the same when installed,
repaired or completed, shall be inspected by a designated, qualified
and properly identified agent of the division of building safety as to
quality of workmanship and compliance with the applicable provisions of
this chapter.
(h) Plumbing work within modular buildings as defined in section
39-4301, Idaho Code, that are constructed in the state of Idaho for in-
stallation on building sites outside the state; provided however, that
no modular building shall be installed on a building site in the state of
Idaho until it has been approved and bears the insignia of approval of
the division as being in compliance with the requirements set forth in
section 39-4304, Idaho Code.
(i) Individuals licensed pursuant to chapter 10, title 54, Idaho Code,
or chapter 50, title 54, Idaho Code, as follows:
(i) Individuals holding a current HVAC or electrical license may
install electrical circuitry from the disconnecting means to a wa-
ter heater and electrical connections to the water heater as long
as the disconnect is in sight from the unit and the circuit from the
disconnecting means to the water heater is no more than fifty (50)
feet long.
(ii) Individuals holding a current HVAC license may install gas
piping and piping for hydronic systems.
(iii) Individuals holding a current HVAC license may install boil-
ers that are not otherwise subject to inspection by the industrial
commission or its authorized agent.
(2) To the extent that an electrical or HVAC installation permit issued
by the Idaho division of building safety includes any part of a plumbing in-
stallation, the permit issued and inspection performed shall be sufficient
to satisfy the permitting and inspecting requirements of this chapter if all
required permit fees have been paid.
(3) Any person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation making
water treatment installations and/or repairs in accordance with the provi-
sions of this chapter shall maintain a surety bond in the amount of two thou-
sand dollars ($2,000).