An Act relating to snowmobile user permits and registration
fees.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. Section 321G.2, subsection 1, paragraph h, Code
2017, is amended by striking the paragraph.
Sec. 2. Section 321G.3, Code 2017, is amended to read as
follows:
321G.3 Registration and user permit required —— penalties.
1. Each snowmobile used by a resident on public land, public
ice, or a designated snowmobile trail of this state shall be
currently registered in this state pursuant to section 321G.4.
A resident shall not operate, maintain, or give permission
for the operation or maintenance of a snowmobile on public
land, public ice, or a designated snowmobile trail unless the
snowmobile is registered in accordance with this chapter.
The owner of a snowmobile must also obtain a user permit in
accordance with section 321G.4A.
2. A violation of subsection 1 is punishable as a
scheduled violation under section 805.8B, subsection 2,
paragraph “a”. When the scheduled fine is paid, the violator
shall submit proof to the department that a valid registration
and user permit have has been obtained by providing a copy
of the registration and user permit to the department within
thirty days of the date the fine is paid. A person who violates
this subsection is guilty of a simple misdemeanor.
Sec. 3. Section 321G.4, subsection 2, Code 2017, is amended
to read as follows:
2. The owner of the snowmobile shall file an application for
registration with the department through the county recorder
of the county of residence in the manner established by the
commission. The application shall be completed by the owner
and shall be accompanied by a fee of fifteen thirty dollars and
a writing fee as provided in section 321G.27. A snowmobile
shall not be registered by the county recorder until the
county recorder is presented with receipts, bills of sale,
or other satisfactory evidence that the sales or use tax has
been paid for the purchase of the snowmobile or that the
owner is exempt from paying the tax. A snowmobile that has
an expired registration certificate from another state may be
registered in this state upon proper application, payment of
all applicable registration and writing fees, and payment of a
penalty of five dollars.
Sec. 4. Section 321G.4B, Code 2017, is amended to read as
follows:
321G.4B Nonresident requirements —— penalties.
1. A nonresident wishing to operate a snowmobile on public
land, public ice, or a designated snowmobile trail of this
state shall obtain a user permit in accordance with section
321G.4A. In addition to obtaining a user permit, a nonresident
shall display a current registration decal or other evidence
of registration or numbering required by the owner’s state of
residence unless the owner resides in a state that does not
register or number snowmobiles.
2. A violation of subsection 1 is punishable as a scheduled
violation under section 805.8B, subsection 2, paragraph “a”.
When the scheduled fine is paid, the violator shall submit
proof to the department that a user permit has been obtained
and provide evidence of registration or numbering as required
by the owner’s state of residence, if applicable, to the
department within thirty days of the date the fine is paid.
A person who violates this section is guilty of a simple
misdemeanor.
Sec. 5. Section 321G.5, Code 2017, is amended to read as
follows:
321G.5 Display of registration and user permit decals decal.
The owner of a snowmobile shall display the registration
decal and user permit decal on the snowmobile in the manner
prescribed by the rules of the commission.
Sec. 6. Section 321G.6, subsections 1 and 4, Code 2017, are
amended to read as follows:
1. Every snowmobile registration certificate and
registration decal issued expires at midnight December 31
unless sooner terminated or discontinued in accordance with
this chapter or rules of the commission. After the first
day of September each year, an unregistered snowmobile
may be registered and a registration may be renewed in one
transaction. The fee is five dollars for the remainder of the
current year, in addition to the registration fee of fifteen
thirty dollars for the subsequent year beginning January 1, and
a writing fee as provided in section 321G.27.
4. A county recorder or a license agent designated by the
director pursuant to section 483A.11 may issue snowmobile
registration renewals electronically pursuant to rules adopted
by the commission. The fee for a registration renewal issued
using an electronic system is fifteen thirty dollars plus an
administrative fee established by the commission and a writing
fee as provided in section 321G.27.
Sec. 7. Section 321G.7, subsection 2, Code 2017, is amended
to read as follows:
2. The department shall remit the fees, including user
permit fees collected pursuant to section 321G.4A, to the
treasurer of state, who shall place the money in a special
snowmobile fund. The money is appropriated to the department
for the snowmobile programs of the state. The programs shall
include grants, subgrants, contracts, or cost-sharing of
snowmobile programs with political subdivisions or incorporated
private organizations or both in accordance with rules adopted
by the commission. Snowmobile fees may be used to support
snowmobile programs on a usage basis. At least fifty eighty
percent of the special fund shall be available for political
subdivisions or incorporated private organizations or both.
Moneys from the special fund not used by the political
subdivisions or incorporated private organizations or both
shall remain in the fund and may be used by the department for
the administration of the snowmobile programs purchase of trail
grooming equipment. Notwithstanding section 8.33, moneys in
the special fund shall not revert to the general fund of the
state at the end of a fiscal year. Notwithstanding section
12C.7, subsection 2, interest or earnings on moneys in the
special fund shall remain in the fund.
Sec. 8. Section 321G.8, Code 2017, is amended to read as
follows:
321G.8 Exempt vehicles.
Registration and user permits shall not be required for the
following described snowmobiles:
1. Snowmobiles owned by the United States, this state, or
another state, or by a governmental subdivision thereof, and
used for enforcement, search and rescue, or official research
and studies, but not for recreational or commercial purposes.
2. Snowmobiles used exclusively as farm implements.
3. Snowmobiles registered with an approved sponsored
snowmobile special event.
Sec. 9. Section 321G.27, subsection 1, paragraph b, Code
2017, is amended by striking the paragraph.
Sec. 10. Section 321G.27, subsection 2, Code 2017, is
amended to read as follows:
2. a. A license agent shall collect a writing fee of
one dollar for a snowmobile registration or for renewal of a
registration by the license agent.
b. A license agent shall retain a writing fee of one dollar
from the sale of each user permit issued by the license agent.
Sec. 11. Section 321G.34, subsection 5, Code 2017, is
amended to read as follows:
5. a. Upon the conviction of a person of any violation of
this chapter or a rule adopted under this chapter, the court,
as a part of the judgment, may suspend or revoke one or more
snowmobile registration or user permit privileges of the person
for any definite period.
b. The court shall revoke all of the person’s snowmobile
registrations or user permits and suspend the privilege of
procuring a registration or user permit for a period of one
year for any person who has been convicted twice within one
year of trespassing while operating a snowmobile. A person
shall not be issued a registration or user permit during the
period of suspension or revocation.
Sec. 12. Section 331.602, subsection 16, Code 2017, is
amended to read as follows:
16. Issue snowmobile and all-terrain vehicle registrations
and user permits as provided in sections 321G.4, 321G.4A,
321G.6, 321G.21, 321I.4, 321I.5, 321I.7, and 321I.22.
Sec. 13. Section 331.605, subsection 1, paragraph d, Code
2017, is amended to read as follows:
d. For the issuance of snowmobile registrations and user
permits, the fees specified in sections section 321G.4 and
321G.4A.
Sec. 14. REPEAL. Section 321G.4A, Code 2017, is repealed.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
This bill relates to snowmobile user permits and
registration fees. The bill eliminates a requirement that
a snowmobile operator must obtain a user permit from the
department of natural resources to operate a snowmobile on
public land, public ice, or a designated snowmobile trail of
the state. Code section 321G.4A, concerning the issuance
of user permits and user permit fees, is repealed and
cross-references to the repealed Code section are stricken.
References to user permits are also stricken.
The bill raises the annual registration fee for a snowmobile
from $15 to $30. The bill also provides that 80 percent
instead of 50 percent of the fees in the special snowmobile
fund shall be available for the use of political subdivisions
or incorporated private organizations or both. The bill
provides that moneys not used by those entities remain in the
fund and may be used by the department of natural resources
for the purchase of trail grooming equipment, instead of for
administration of snowmobile programs.
The bill adds an exemption from registration requirements
for snowmobiles that are registered with an approved sponsored
snowmobile special event.