An Act prohibiting the construction of confinement feeding
operation structures that are part of confinement feeding
operations located in certain subwatersheds, making
penalties applicable, and including effective date
provisions.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. NEW SECTION. 459.104 Moratorium —— confinement
feeding operations —— impaired waters.
1. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires:
a. “Section 303(d) list” means the same as defined in
section 455B.171.
b. “Subwatershed” means the same as defined in section
466B.2.
2. a. A person shall not construct, including expand, a
confinement feeding operation structure, if the confinement
feeding operation structure would be located in a subwatershed
that drains into a water body or water segment that has been
placed on the department’s section 303(d) list, regardless of
whether a total maximum daily load for that water body or water
segment has been developed.
b. The department shall not file or approve an application
for a permit to construct, including expand, a confinement
feeding operation structure, if the person could not construct
the confinement feeding operation structure under paragraph
“a”.
3. Subsection 2 does not apply to prevent a person from
constructing, including expanding, a confinement feeding
operation structure as otherwise provided in this subchapter,
if the confinement feeding operation structure is located in a
subwatershed that drains into a water body or water segment,
and the department does all of the following:
a. Removes the water body or water segment from the section
303(d) list.
b. Determines that the water body or water segment is
classified for a primary contact recreational use as provided
in 567 IAC 61.3.
4. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person from
completing construction, including expansion, of a confinement
feeding operation structure, if prior to the effective date
of this Act, the person has begun construction, including
expansion, of the confinement feeding operation structure as
otherwise allowed under this chapter.
Sec. 2. EFFECTIVE UPON ENACTMENT. This Act, being deemed of
immediate importance, takes effect upon enactment.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
BILL’S PROVISIONS —— GENERAL. This bill amends the “Animal
Agriculture Compliance Act” (Code chapter 459) which in
large part provides for the regulation of confinement feeding
operations (operations) including associated confinement
feeding operation structures (structures) such as buildings or
manure storage structures. The Code chapter is regulated and
enforced by the department of natural resources (DNR) which
also enforces provisions of other environmental regulations
such as the federal Clean Water Act under the supervision of
the United States environmental protection agency (EPA).
BILL’S PROVISIONS —— MORATORIUM. The bill prohibits the
construction of a structure, if the structure’s operation is
located in a subwatershed that includes a water body or water
segment that has been placed on a list of impaired waters. The
prohibition would no longer apply once the water was removed
from the list and DNR determined that the water meets the state
surface water classification for primary contact recreational
use.
BACKGROUND. DNR’s list of impaired waters is approved by EPA
according to federal and state requirements (33 U.S.C. §1313
and Code sections 455B.194 and 455B.195). DNR is also required
to develop a plan for restoring the impaired waters, including
by identifying its total maximum daily loads; commonly
referred to as TMDL that calculates the amount of contaminants
that a water body may receive and still meet federal water
quality standards (40 C.F.R. §130.7(b)(4)). Based on these
measurements, the department classifies surface waters
for a number of designated uses including primary contact
recreational use which means that the water is considered safe
for uses that may result in a person’s prolonged and direct
contact with the water, including by ingestion while swimming
(33 U.S.C. §1251(a)(2) and 567 IAC 61.3).
APPLICABLE PENALTIES. Under Code chapter 459, different
civil penalties apply to violations involving water quality.
A person who violates a provision regulating water quality is
subject to an administratively assessed civil penalty of not
more than $10,000, or a judicially assessed amount of not more
than $5,000 per each day of the violation (Code section 459.603
referring to Code sections 455B.109 and 455B.191).
EFFECTIVE DATE. The bill, if enacted, would take effect upon
enactment.