An Act establishing covenant marriages and including effective
date provisions.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. Section 331.602, Code 2017, is amended by adding
the following new subsection:
NEW SUBSECTION. 33. Record all declarations of intent
pursuant to chapter 595A that are presented to the recorder’s
office for recordation, upon payment of a fee in accordance
with section 331.604.
Sec. 2. NEW SECTION. 595.3B Certificate of marriage ——
covenant marriage designation.
In addition to any other information contained in a
certificate of marriage, the certificate of marriage shall
include a section to allow the parties to designate the
marriage as a covenant marriage.
Sec. 3. NEW SECTION. 595.3C Covenant marriage ——
information pamphlet.
The county registrar shall provide each applicant for a
marriage license with a copy of the informational pamphlet
on covenant marriage prepared by the office of the attorney
general pursuant to section 595A.5.
Sec. 4. NEW SECTION. 595.14 Covenant marriage ——
declaration return.
If the parties wish to designate the marriage a covenant
marriage, after the marriage has been solemnized, the
officiating minister or magistrate shall return the completed
certificate of marriage with the section designating the
marriage as a covenant marriage clearly indicated to the county
registrar in the county in which the parties applied for a
license to marry, within fifteen days of the solemnization.
Additionally, the parties to the marriage shall record the
declaration of intent with the county recorder in the county in
which the parties applied for the license to marry, and shall
pay the fee in accordance with section 331.604.
Sec. 5. NEW SECTION. 595A.1 Covenant marriage —— intention
to create —— requirements —— contents of declaration of intent
to create a covenant marriage.
1. Beginning January 1, 2018, parties who are not parties to
an existing marriage as specified in section 595A.2, who intend
to enter into a covenant marriage, shall execute a declaration
of intent to execute a covenant marriage as provided in this
section.
2. Parties to a covenant marriage who are not parties to
an existing marriage as specified in section 595A.2, shall
receive at least twelve hours of premarital education prior
to entering into the covenant marriage which emphasizes the
nature, purposes, and the responsibilities of a covenant
marriage. The premarital education shall be provided by a
licensed or ordained minister, or the minister’s designee, a
person authorized to solemnize marriages under section 595.10,
or a marital and family therapist licensed pursuant to chapter
154D. The education provided shall include a discussion of the
seriousness of covenant marriage, communication of the fact
that a covenant marriage is a commitment for life, a discussion
of the obligation to seek marital counseling in times of
marital difficulties, and a discussion of the exclusive grounds
for legally terminating a covenant marriage.
3. A declaration of intent to contract a covenant marriage
shall contain all of the following:
a. The following written statement:
We solemnly declare that marriage is a covenant between
a man and a woman who agree to live together as husband and
wife for as long as they both live. We have chosen each other
carefully and have received premarital education on the nature,
purposes, and responsibilities of marriage. We understand that
a covenant marriage is for life. If we experience marital
difficulties, we commit ourselves to take all reasonable
efforts to preserve our marriage, including marital counseling.
With full knowledge of what this commitment means, we do
declare that our marriage will be bound by Iowa law on covenant
marriages and we promise to love, honor, and care for one
another as husband and wife for the rest of our lives.
b. An affidavit by the parties, signed by the person who
provided the premarital education, that the parties have
received the required premarital education from a person
authorized to provide the premarital education under this
section.
c. One of the following, as applicable:
(1) The signature of both parties, witnessed by a notary
public.
(2) If one party is a minor or if both parties are minors,
the written consent or authorization of those persons required
under section 595.2 to consent to or authorize the marriage of
minors.
4. A declaration of intent shall be prepared in duplicate
originals, with one original being retained by the parties and
the other being returned to the county recorder of the county
in which the parties applied for the license to marry following
the solemnization of the marriage.
Sec. 6. NEW SECTION. 595A.2 Existing marriages ——
designation as a covenant marriage.
1. On or after January 1, 2018, married parties may
designate their marriage as a covenant marriage by completing
a declaration of intent as specified in this section, filing
a duplicate original of the completed declaration of intent
with the county recorder in the county in which the parties
reside, and paying the fee in accordance with section 331.604.
The county recorder shall make a notation on the declaration
of intent identifying the source of issuance of the original
marriage license of the parties.
2. A declaration of intent to designate an existing marriage
as a covenant marriage shall contain all of the following:
a. The following written statement:
We solemnly declare that marriage is a covenant between a man
and a woman who agree to live together as husband and wife for
as long as they both live. We have chosen each other carefully
and understand that a covenant marriage is for life. If we
experience marital difficulties, we commit ourselves to take
all reasonable efforts to preserve our marriage, including
marital counseling.
With full knowledge of what this commitment means, we do
declare that our marriage will be bound by Iowa law on covenant
marriages and we promise to love, honor, and care for one
another as husband and wife for the rest of our lives.
b. The signature of both parties, witnessed by a notary
public.
Sec. 7. NEW SECTION. 595A.3 Dissolution of a covenant
marriage —— exclusive grounds.
1. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, and
subsequent to the parties obtaining marital counseling, a party
to a covenant marriage may obtain a dissolution of marriage,
only upon proof of any of the following:
a. The other party has committed adultery.
b. The other party has committed a felony and has been
sentenced to imprisonment.
c. The other party has abandoned the matrimonial domicile
for a period of one year and refuses to return.
d. The other party has physically or sexually abused the
party seeking the dissolution or a child of one of the parties
living in the matrimonial domicile, or the other party has been
found to have engaged in domestic abuse pursuant to section
236.5.
e. The parties have been living separate and apart
continuously without reconciliation for a period of at least
one year.
f. The other party has habitually abused drugs or alcohol.
g. The parties have agreed to a dissolution of marriage.
2. In a11 proceedings for dissolution of marriage pursuant
to subsection 1, the court may issue an order of temporary
support and maintenance during the pendency of the proceedings.
Notwithstanding the time period requirements of the grounds
specified pursuant to subsection 1, paragraph “c” or “e”,
a party to a covenant marriage may petition the court for
separate support and maintenance prior to the elapsing of the
specified time period.
Sec. 8. NEW SECTION. 595A.4 Covenant marriage —— other
applicable laws.
1. A covenant marriage shall be governed by all of the
nonconflicting provisions of chapter 595.
2. A dissolution of a covenant marriage shall be governed by
all of the nonconflicting provisions of chapter 598.
Sec. 9. NEW SECTION. 595A.5 Attorney general —— pamphlet.
Prior to July 1, 2017, the office of the attorney general
shall develop an informational pamphlet entitled “Covenant
Marriage Option” which shall outline in sufficient detail
the requirements for entering into a covenant marriage or
designating an existing marriage as a covenant marriage,
the implications of entering into a covenant marriage or
designating an existing marriage as a covenant marriage, the
grounds for dissolution of a covenant marriage, and the legal
differences between a covenant marriage and a noncovenant
marriage. The informational pamphlet shall be made available
to all offices of the county registrar and to all persons who
provide premarital and marital education under this chapter.
Sec. 10. EFFECTIVE DATE. The section of this Act enacting
section 595A.5 relating to the pamphlet to be developed by the
attorney general, being deemed of immediate importance, takes
effect upon enactment.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
This bill establishes the procedure and requirements for
a covenant marriage. The bill requires the county registrar
to provide each applicant for a marriage license with an
informational pamphlet on covenant marriage, prepared by
the office of the attorney general. The bill requires the
certificate of marriage to include a place to allow the parties
to designate the marriage as a covenant marriage. After the
marriage is solemnized, the officiating minister or magistrate
is directed to return the completed certificate of marriage
with the section designating the marriage a covenant marriage
clearly indicated to the county registrar in the county in
which the parties applied for a license to marry, within 15
days of the solemnization. Additionally, the parties are
directed to record the declaration of intent with the county
recorder in the county in which the parties applied for the
license to marry.
The bill describes a covenant marriage, specifies the
contents of the declaration of intent and requires a statement
relating to the intent of the parties to designate their
marriage as a covenant marriage, requires a statement from
the person who provided the premarital education relating to
confirmation of the completion by the parties of the required
education, and requires the signature of each party, or if
one or both of the parties are minors, the written consent or
authorization of those persons designated by law to provide
consent or authorization. The declaration of intent is to
be prepared in duplicate originals with one original being
retained by the parties and one original being filed with the
county recorder in the county in which the parties applied for
the license to marry following solemnization of the marriage.
The bill also provides a procedure for parties to an existing
marriage on or after January 1, 2018, to designate their
marriage as a covenant marriage.
The bill provides the exclusive grounds for obtaining
a dissolution of a covenant marriage, and provides that
nonconflicting provisions of the marriage chapter (Code chapter
595) and the dissolution chapter (Code chapter 598) apply to
covenant marriages.
The bill directs the office of the attorney general, prior to
July 1, 2017, to develop a pamphlet entitled “Covenant Marriage
Option” to outline the requirements of a covenant marriage,
the implications of entering into a covenant marriage, the
grounds for dissolution of a covenant marriage, and the legal
differences between covenant and noncovenant marriages. The
pamphlet is to be available at the offices of the county
registrar and to all persons who provide premarital and marital
education. This provision of the bill takes effect upon
enactment.