An Act relating to the property tax exemption for dwelling
units owned and managed by certain nonprofit organizations
and including applicability provisions.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. Section 427.1, subsection 21A, Code 2018, is
amended to read as follows:
21A. Dwelling unit property owned by community housing
development organization. Dwelling unit property owned, and
managed, or controlled by a community housing development
organization, as recognized by the state of Iowa and the
federal government pursuant to criteria for community housing
development organization designation contained in the HOME
program of the federal National Affordable Housing Act of 1990,
if the organization is also a nonprofit organization exempt
from federal income tax under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code and owns and manages more than one hundred fifty
dwelling units that are located in a city with a population of
more than one hundred ten eighty thousand. For the 2005 and
2006 assessment years beginning January 1, 2005, and January
1, 2006, an application is not required to be filed to receive
the exemption. For the 2007 assessment year beginning January
1, 2007, and subsequent assessment years, an application for
exemption must be filed with the assessing authority not later
than February 1 of the assessment year for which the exemption
is sought. Upon the filing and allowance of the claim, the
claim shall be allowed on the property for successive years
without further filing as long as the property continues to
qualify for the exemption.
Sec. 2. IMPLEMENTATION. Section 25B.7 shall not apply to
this Act.
Sec. 3. APPLICABILITY. This Act applies to assessment years
beginning on or after January 1, 2019.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
Current law provides an exemption from property taxation
for dwelling unit property owned and managed by a nonprofit
community housing development organization if the organization
owns and manages more than 150 dwelling units located in a city
with a population of more than 110,000. This bill authorizes
the property tax exemption for dwelling unit property if the
property is owned, managed, or controlled by a community
housing development organization, instead of requiring both
ownership and management of the property. The bill also lowers
the city population criteria from 110,000 to 80,000.
The bill makes inapplicable Code section 25B.7. Code
section 25B.7 provides that for a property tax credit or
exemption enacted on or after January 1, 1997, if a state
appropriation made to fund the credit or exemption is not
sufficient to fully fund the credit or exemption, the political
subdivision shall be required to extend to the taxpayer only
that portion of the credit or exemption estimated by the
department of revenue to be funded by the state appropriation.
This bill applies to assessment years beginning on or after
January 1, 2019.