An Act relating to the use of unmanned aerial vehicles, and
providing penalties.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. Section 708.11, subsection 1, paragraph b, Code
2017, is amended to read as follows:
b. “Course of conduct” means repeatedly maintaining a visual
or physical proximity to a person without legitimate purpose or
repeatedly conveying oral or written threats, threats implied
by conduct, or a combination thereof, directed at or toward a
person. “Course of conduct” includes the use of an unmanned
aerial vehicle, as defined in section 708C.1, to maintain
visual or physical proximity to a person as provided in this
paragraph.
Sec. 2. Section 708A.1, subsection 1, Code 2017, is amended
to read as follows:
1. “Material support or resources” means knowingly assisting
or providing money, financial securities, financial services,
lodging, training, safe houses, false documentation or
identification, communication equipment, facilities, weapons,
lethal substances, explosives, personnel, transportation,
unmanned aerial vehicles, and other physical assets, except
medicine or religious materials, for the purpose of assisting a
person in the commission of an act of terrorism.
Sec. 3. NEW SECTION. 708C.1 Use of unmanned aerial vehicle
—— exceptions —— penalty.
1. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires:
a. “Agency” means a state agency or political subdivision of
this state or any person acting on behalf of a state agency or
political subdivision.
b. “Dangerous weapon” includes an instrument or device
designed for causing damage to property.
c. “Image” means any capturing of sound waves, thermal,
infrared, ultraviolet, visible light, or other electromagnetic
wave, odor, or other conditions existing on or about real
property in this state or a person located on that property.
d. “Unmanned aerial vehicle” means an aircraft that is
operated without the possibility of direct human intervention
from within or on the aircraft.
2. Agencies.
a. Except as provided in this paragraph “a”, an agency shall
not use an unmanned aerial vehicle to capture an image or to
receive or disclose an image acquired through the use of an
unmanned aerial vehicle.
(1) An agency may use an unmanned aerial vehicle to capture
an image or to receive or disclose an image acquired through
the use of an unmanned aerial vehicle in connection with a
search warrant that has been issued under the conditions of
section 808.2 authorizing the use on private property.
(2) An agency may use an unmanned aerial vehicle without
preserving any images under the following circumstances:
(a) When searching for a suspect who committed a crime.
(b) When supporting the tactical operation of another
agency.
(c) For crowd monitoring at events.
(3) (a) An agency may use an unmanned aerial vehicle if an
emergency exists based on a reasonable belief that an imminent
threat exists to the life or safety of a person and within
forty-eight hours of the emergency use a supervisory official
of the agency files a sworn statement with the district court
detailing the grounds for using the unmanned aerial vehicle in
the emergency.
(b) If the supervisory official fails to file the sworn
statement as required by this subparagraph (3), the supervisory
official shall be removed from any future involvement with the
agency’s use of an unmanned aerial vehicle, and the agency
shall be required to obtain approval from the applicable
supervisory body under paragraph “c” prior to any future use of
an unmanned aerial vehicle by the agency.
(4) An agency may use an unmanned aerial vehicle on public
property.
b. An agency shall not archive data captured or received
through the use of an unmanned aerial vehicle unless the data
was captured or received during an operation in conjunction
with a search warrant or during the existence of an emergency
under paragraph “a”, subparagraph (3), but only for forty-eight
hours except upon entry of a district court order requiring the
archiving of the data for more than forty-eight hours.
c. The acquisition of an unmanned aerial vehicle by a
state agency shall be approved by the general assembly prior
to such an acquisition. The acquisition of an unmanned aerial
vehicle at the county, city, or local government level shall be
approved by the county board of supervisors, city council, or
other supervisory legislative body that oversees the political
subdivision.
d. An agency shall adopt best practices to ensure that
unauthorized access to an unmanned aerial vehicle or images
captured or received by the unmanned aerial vehicle does not
occur.
3. Persons.
a. A person shall not use an unmanned aerial vehicle to
capture an image of an individual or private property with
the intent to conduct surveillance, or to stalk, follow, or
intimidate another person.
b. A person may use an unmanned aerial vehicle to capture
or receive an image of an individual if the individual is on
public property, or the person has received permission from the
individual to capture or receive such an image.
c. A person shall not use an unmanned aerial vehicle
equipped with an instrument that is capable of doing any of the
following unless the unmanned aerial vehicle is used over the
real property owned by the person or the person has permission
from the owner or a tenant of the real property to use the
unmanned aerial vehicle over the real property:
(1) Emitting a peculiar sound or excessive noise.
(2) Spraying a liquid or gas.
(3) Dropping an object.
4. Accredited postsecondary institutions. An accredited
postsecondary institution, other than a special security
officer or a security agency employed by or otherwise connected
with the institution, may use an unmanned aerial vehicle to
capture or receive an image for research purposes, or to retain
or distribute such an image.
5. An unmanned aerial vehicle shall not be equipped with a
dangerous weapon.
6. This section does not apply to an operation, exercise,
or mission of any branch of the United States military, or the
Iowa national guard.
7. a. A person who violates this section commits an
aggravated misdemeanor.
b. A person who violates this section and causes serious
injury to another person commits a class “D” felony.
c. A person who violates this section and causes death to
another person commits a class “C” felony.
8. a. On June 30, 2018, and every June 30 thereafter, each
state agency and each political subdivision, if required to
do so by the supervising legislative body of the political
subdivision, that uses an unmanned aerial vehicle shall provide
the department of public safety with the following information:
(1) The number of instances in which an unmanned aerial
vehicle was used by the agency and the purpose of each use.
(2) The number of crime investigations aided by the use of
an unmanned aerial vehicle and a description of how the use of
an unmanned aerial vehicle aided each investigation.
(3) The number of instances an unmanned aerial vehicle was
used for purposes other than in a criminal investigation and a
description of how the use of the unmanned aerial vehicle aided
in that purpose.
(4) The annual cost of the unmanned aerial vehicle program
of the agency.
b. The department of public safety shall compile the
information provided by the agencies under this subsection and
present a report detailing the use of unmanned aerial vehicles
to the legislative standing committees on government oversight
by January 15, 2019, and every January 15 thereafter.
Sec. 4. Section 717A.1, Code 2017, is amended by adding the
following new subsections:
NEW SUBSECTION. 6A. “Control” includes the actions of a
person using an unmanned aerial vehicle.
NEW SUBSECTION. 10A. “Enter” includes the actions of a
person using an unmanned aerial vehicle.
NEW SUBSECTION. 14. “Unmanned aerial vehicle” means the
same as defined in section 708C.1.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
This bill relates to the use of unmanned aerial vehicles by
governmental agencies and other persons.
The bill defines “unmanned aerial vehicle” to mean an
aircraft that is operated without the possibility of direct
human intervention from within or on the aircraft.
The bill defines “image” to mean any capturing of sound
waves, thermal, infrared, ultraviolet, visible light, or other
electromagnetic wave, odor, or other conditions existing on or
about real property in this state or a person located on that
property.
The bill prohibits a governmental agency from using an
unmanned aerial vehicle to capture an image or to receive or
disclose an image acquired through the use of an unmanned
aerial vehicle unless used under the following circumstances:
the use is in connection with a search warrant, the use is
related to the search for a criminal suspect, to provide
support to another tactical operation, or for crowd monitoring,
the use is based upon a reasonable belief that an emergency
exists that threatens the life or safety of a person, or the
use is on public property.
If a governmental agency uses an unmanned aerial vehicle
in an emergency, the bill requires the supervisory official
of such an agency to file a sworn statement with the court
detailing the grounds for using the unmanned aerial vehicle in
the emergency within 48 hours of its use. The bill specifies
that if the supervisory official fails to file the sworn
statement, the supervisory official is barred from future
involvement with the agency’s use of unmanned aerial vehicles,
and the agency must seek approval from the applicable governing
body for any future use of an unmanned aerial vehicle.
The bill prohibits a governmental agency from archiving data
captured or received through the use of an unmanned aerial
vehicle unless the data is captured or received in connection
with a search warrant, or during an emergency, but only for
48 hours except upon entry of a court order requiring the
archiving of the data for more than 48 hours.
The bill requires that an unmanned aerial vehicle purchased
by a state agency be approved by the general assembly prior to
such an acquisition. The acquisition of an unmanned aerial
vehicle at the county, city, or local government level shall
be approved by the board of supervisors, city council, or
other supervisory legislative body that oversees the political
subdivision.
The bill prohibits a person from using an unmanned aerial
vehicle to capture an image of an individual or private
property with the intent to conduct surveillance, or to stalk,
follow, or intimidate another person. The bill allows a person
using an unmanned aerial vehicle to capture an image of an
individual if the individual is on public property or the
person has received permission from the individual to capture
or receive such an image.
The bill prohibits a person from using an unmanned aerial
vehicle equipped with an instrument that is capable of emitting
a peculiar sound or excessive noise, spraying a liquid or gas,
or dropping an object. The bill allows an unmanned aerial
vehicle to be equipped with such instruments if the person uses
the unmanned aerial vehicle over the real property owned by the
person or the person has permission from the owner or tenant of
the real property to use an unmanned aerial vehicle equipped
with such instruments.
The bill allows an accredited postsecondary institution,
other than a special security officer or security agency
employed by or otherwise connected with the institution, to use
an unmanned aerial vehicle to capture or receive an image for
research purposes, or to retain or distribute such an image.
The bill prohibits an unmanned aerial vehicle from being
equipped with a dangerous weapon. The bill defines “dangerous
weapon” to mean the same as defined in Code section 702.7,
but also includes an instrument or device designed to damage
property.
The bill does not apply to an operation, exercise, or mission
of any branch of the United States military, or the Iowa
national guard.
Under the bill, each state agency and each political
subdivision, if required to do so by the supervising
legislative body of the political subdivision, that uses an
unmanned aerial vehicle shall provide information related to
the use of the unmanned aerial vehicle to the department of
public safety by June 30, 2018, and every June 30 thereafter.
The bill also requires the department of public safety to
compile such information and file a report to the standing
committees on government oversight by January 15, 2019, and
every January 15 thereafter.
A person who violates the bill commits an aggravated
misdemeanor. If the violation causes serious injury the person
commits a class “D” felony, and if the violation causes death
the person commits a class “C” felony.
An aggravated misdemeanor is punishable by confinement for
no more than two years and a fine of at least $625 but not more
than $6,250. A class “D” felony is punishable by confinement
for no more than five years and a fine of at least $750 but
not more than $7,500. A class “C” felony is punishable by
confinement for no more than 10 years and a fine of at least
$1,000 but not more than $10,000.
In addition, the bill specifies that a “course of conduct”
without a legitimate purpose includes the use of an unmanned
aerial vehicle for purposes of proving the criminal offense of
stalking.
The bill also specifies that a person who knowingly assists
in providing an unmanned aerial vehicle to a person who commits
or attempts to commit terrorism is guilty of soliciting or
providing material support or resources for terrorism in
violation of Code section 708A.4.
The bill further provides, for purposes of violations
under Code chapter 717A (offenses relating to agricultural
production), a person “controls” or “enters” an animal facility
or a crop operation property if the actions of the person
include the use of an unmanned aerial vehicle.