An Act establishing a motor vehicle insurance verification
program, establishing fees, and including penalty and
effective date provisions.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. Section 321.11, subsection 3, Code 2017, is
amended to read as follows:
3. Notwithstanding other provisions of this section to the
contrary, the department shall not release personal information
to a person, other than to an officer or employee of a law
enforcement agency, an employee of a federal or state agency
or political subdivision in the performance of the employee’s
official duties, a contract employee of the department of
inspections and appeals in the conduct of an investigation, or
a licensed private investigation agency or a licensed security
service or a licensed employee of either, if the information is
requested by the presentation of a registration plate number.
However, the department may release personal information to the
department’s designated agent for the purposes of chapter 321B.
In addition, an officer or employee of a law enforcement agency
may release the name, address, and telephone number of a motor
vehicle registrant to a person requesting the information by
the presentation of a registration plate number if the officer
or employee of the law enforcement agency believes that the
release of the information is necessary in the performance of
the officer’s or employee’s duties.
Sec. 2. NEW SECTION. 321B.1 Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Motor
Vehicle Insurance Verification Act”.
Sec. 3. NEW SECTION. 321B.2 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise
requires:
1. “Advisory council” means the group established pursuant
to section 321B.3, subsection 2.
2. “Database” means the motor vehicle insurance verification
database created under this chapter.
3. “Department” means the department of transportation.
4. “Designated agent” means the third party with which the
department contracts under section 321B.3.
5. “Financial institution” means financial institution as
defined in 18 U.S.C. §20.
6. “Motor vehicle” means motor vehicle as defined in section
321.1.
7. “Program” means the motor vehicle insurance verification
program created under this chapter.
8. “Real-time internet services model” means an electronic
service established by insurers through the internet, the
world wide web, or a similar proprietary or common carrier
electronic system that complies with the specifications and
standards of the insurance industry committee on motor vehicle
administration and that is available twenty-four hours per
day, seven days per week, subject to reasonable allowances for
scheduled maintenance or temporary system failures.
Sec. 4. NEW SECTION. 321B.3 Motor vehicle insurance
verification program —— advisory council.
1. A motor vehicle insurance verification program is
created within the department to be administered by the
department. The purposes of the program include all of the
following:
a. To establish a motor vehicle insurance verification
database to verify compliance with the requirements of section
321.20B.
b. To assist in reducing the number of uninsured motor
vehicles on the highways of the state.
c. To assist in increasing compliance with motor vehicle
registration requirements and for other law enforcement
purposes.
d. To assist in protecting the bona fide security interests
of financial institutions in motor vehicles.
2. a. The department shall establish an advisory council,
chaired by the director of the department or a representative
of the department appointed by the director, consisting of
six members including the director of the department or the
representative of the department appointed by the director,
a representative of the department of public safety, an
insurance company representative appointed by the commissioner
of insurance, an insurance agent appointed by the commissioner
of insurance, a representative of a trade association of
property and casualty insurers appointed by the commissioner
of insurance, and a representative of a vendor with experience
implementing real-time internet services models and databases
similar to the database created under this chapter appointed by
the director of the department.
b. The advisory council shall do all of the following:
(1) Make recommendations to the department on the best
methods and practices for implementing a real-time internet
services model for insurance verification.
(2) Assist in the development of a guide for insurers
detailing the data fields and other information necessary for
compliance with this chapter.
(3) Provide an annual report to the department detailing the
improvements and implementation efforts relating to insurance
verification in other states for consideration in improving
compliance and operations in this state.
3. Following the competitive bidding procedures as provided
in chapter 8A, subchapter III, the department shall contract
with a third party to act as the department’s designated agent
for administration of this chapter. For the period of the
contract, the designated agent shall establish and maintain a
computer database containing the following information:
a. Information provided by insurers under section 321B.5.
b. Information provided by the department under subsection
6.
c. Information obtained using a real-time internet services
model.
d. Any other information provided by the department pursuant
to this chapter.
4. The database shall be developed and maintained, and
access to a real-time internet services model shall be
provided, in accordance with guidelines established by the
department by rule to allow authorized state and local law
enforcement agencies and financial institutions to efficiently
access the records of the database and real-time internet
services model, including reports useful for the implementation
of this chapter, twenty-four hours per day, seven days
per week, subject to reasonable allowances for scheduled
maintenance or temporary system failures.
a. Database reports shall be in a form and contain
information approved by the department.
b. Database reports may be made available through the
department’s internet site or through other electronic media
if the department determines that sufficient security is
provided to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
chapter regarding limitations on disclosure of information in
the database.
c. The department shall consult with the chief information
officer appointed under section 8B.2 for the purpose of
developing network security requirements for the database.
5. At least twice monthly, the designated agent shall do the
following, using information provided by the department:
a. Update the database with motor vehicle insurance
information provided by insurers in accordance with section
321B.5.
b. Compare all current motor vehicle registrations against
the database. If records in the database indicate that a
registered motor vehicle is not covered under an owner’s
policy of liability insurance, the designated agent shall
use a real-time internet services model to determine if the
registered motor vehicle is covered under an owner’s policy of
liability insurance.
6. On or before the seventh day of each calendar month, the
department shall provide the designated agent with the make,
model, year, and vehicle identification number of each vehicle
in the department’s motor vehicle database, and the name and
address of each person listed on each vehicle’s registration.
7. The department shall adopt rules in accordance with
chapter 17A establishing procedures for the use of the
department’s motor vehicle database for the purposes of
administering and enforcing this chapter.
8. a. The designated agent shall archive database files at
least semiannually for auditing purposes.
b. The department shall audit the program at least annually.
The audit shall include verification of:
(1) Billings made by the designated agent.
(2) The accuracy of the designated agent’s matching of
vehicle registration records with insurance data.
Sec. 5. NEW SECTION. 321B.4 Enforcement of financial
responsibility requirements —— penalty.
1. If records in the database and the real-time internet
services model used by the designated agent indicate that a
registered motor vehicle is not covered under an owner’s policy
of liability insurance for three consecutive months, at the
direction of the department the designated agent shall provide
notice by first-class mail to the owner of the motor vehicle
that the owner has fifteen days from the date the notice was
mailed to provide one of the following:
a. Proof of financial liability coverage as defined in
section 321.1, subsection 24B.
b. Proof that the owner is exempt from the requirement to
maintain proof of financial liability coverage under section
321.20B.
2. If, after fifteen days, the owner of the motor vehicle
fails to provide satisfactory proof of financial liability
coverage, the designated agent shall provide a second notice
by first-class mail to the owner of the motor vehicle allowing
the owner an additional fifteen days from the date the second
notice was mailed to provide the information requested under
subsection 1.
3. a. The designated agent shall update the database
regarding each notice sent to a motor vehicle owner under
subsections 1 and 2, indicating the information provided by the
motor vehicle owner or the owner’s failure to provide proof of
financial liability coverage, as applicable.
b. If the owner of a motor vehicle provides proof to the
department or the designated agent that the owner’s motor
vehicle is covered by an acceptable form of financial liability
coverage described in section 321.1, subsection 24B, paragraph
“b”, “c”, or “d”, the information shall be recorded in the
database.
c. If the designated agent determines the motor vehicle
is appropriately insured using a real-time internet services
model, the information shall be recorded in the database.
4. a. If the owner of a motor vehicle fails to provide
proof of financial liability coverage following receipt of the
second notice under subsection 2, the designated agent shall
notify the department, and the department shall suspend the
registration of the motor vehicle.
b. The department shall provide to the owner of the motor
vehicle appropriate notice of the suspension, order the owner
to surrender the registration plates and registration receipt
for the vehicle to the county treasurer, advise the owner of
the legal consequences of operating a vehicle with a suspended
registration and without financial liability coverage, and
instruct the owner on how to reinstate the vehicle registration
once the owner has obtained financial liability coverage for
the vehicle.
5. a. A person shall not provide a false or fraudulent
statement to the department or the department’s designated
agent in regard to proceedings under this chapter.
b. In addition to any other penalties, a person who violates
paragraph “a” is guilty of a simple misdemeanor.
6. A suspension of registration under this chapter is in
addition to any other penalty imposed by law. This chapter
does not affect other actions or penalties that may be taken or
imposed for a violation of section 321.20B or other law.
7. a. A registration that has been suspended under this
section shall not be reinstated and a registration shall not be
issued to the holder of the suspended registration until the
person does all of the following:
(1) Pays to the department an administrative reinstatement
fee of one hundred dollars, in addition to any other penalty
imposed by law.
(2) Complies with the requirements of section 321.20B and
this chapter.
b. Reinstatement fees collected under this subsection shall
be retained by the department as repayment receipts as defined
in section 8.2 and shall be used exclusively to offset the
costs of administering the program, including payments made by
the department to the department’s designated agent.
Sec. 6. NEW SECTION. 321B.5 Motor vehicle insurance
reporting —— penalty.
1. a. Except as provided in paragraph “b”, each insurer
that issues a policy to a motor vehicle owner in this state
that includes motor vehicle liability coverage, uninsured
motorist coverage, underinsured motorist coverage, or
personal injury coverage shall, on or before the seventh
and twenty-first days of each calendar month, submit to the
department’s designated agent a record of each motor vehicle
insurance policy that was issued by the insurer and in effect
for a vehicle registered or garaged in this state as of the
date of the previous submission.
b. An insurer is not required to provide a record of a motor
vehicle insurance policy under paragraph “a” if the policy
covers a vehicle that is registered under chapter 326.
c. This subsection does not preclude more frequent
reporting.
2. A record provided by an insurer under subsection 1,
paragraph “a”, shall include all of the following:
a. The name, date of birth, and driver’s license number, if
the insured provides a driver’s license number to the insurer,
of each insured owner or operator, and the address of the named
insured.
b. The make, year, and vehicle identification number of each
insured vehicle.
c. The policy number and effective date of each policy.
3. An insurer shall provide the information required under
this section via electronic means or via another means the
designated agent agrees to accept.
4. a. The department may assess a civil penalty of not more
than two hundred fifty dollars for each day an insurer fails to
comply with this section.
b. If an insurer shows that the failure to comply with this
section was inadvertent, accidental, or the result of excusable
neglect, the department may waive the civil penalty.
c. An insurer that discloses records to the department’s
designated agent in a reasonable, good-faith effort to comply
with the requirements of this section shall not be subject to a
civil penalty under paragraph “a”.
Sec. 7. NEW SECTION. 321B.6 Disclosure of database
information —— penalty.
1. Information provided to the designated agent and
information contained in the database under this chapter are
confidential and subject to the provisions and penalties of 18
U.S.C. §2721. Such information may not be disclosed, except
as follows:
a. For the purpose of investigating, litigating, or
enforcing the financial liability coverage requirements
of section 321.20B, the designated agent shall provide an
electronic record to a state or local government agency or
court verifying motor vehicle financial liability coverage
information.
b. For the purpose of investigating, litigating, or
enforcing the financial liability coverage requirements of
section 321.20B, the designated agent shall, upon request,
issue to any state or local government agency or court a
certificate documenting motor vehicle financial liability
coverage, according to the database, of a specific individual
or motor vehicle for the time period designated by the
government agency or court.
c. Upon request, the department or its designated agent
shall disclose whether an individual is covered under a motor
vehicle insurance policy, proof of the insurance coverage
policy, and the insurance company name to:
(1) The individual or, if the individual is deceased,
any person who is an interested party in the estate of the
individual as provided under chapter 633.
(2) The parent or legal guardian of the individual if the
individual is an unemancipated minor.
(3) The legal guardian of the individual if the individual
is legally incapacitated.
(4) A person who has power of attorney for the individual.
(5) A person who submits a notarized release from the
individual dated no more than ninety days before the date the
request is made.
(6) A person suffering loss or injury in a motor vehicle
accident in which the individual was involved, but only as part
of an accident report as authorized in section 321.271 relating
to access to accident reports.
d. For the purpose of investigating, enforcing, or
prosecuting laws or issuing citations, information related to a
motor vehicle owner or operator’s financial liability coverage
under section 321.20B may be provided to state or local law
enforcement agencies.
e. Upon request of a peace officer acting in an official
capacity under the provisions of paragraph “d”, the department
or the designated agent shall, upon request, disclose relevant
information contained in the database.
f. For the purpose of the state auditor conducting audits
of the program.
g. Upon request of a financial institution for the purpose
of protecting the financial institution’s bona fide security
interest in a motor vehicle.
2. a. The department may allow the designated agent to
prepare and deliver, upon request, a report on the insurance
information of a person or motor vehicle in accordance with
this section. The report may be in the form of:
(1) A certified copy that is considered admissible in any
court proceeding in the same manner as the original.
(2) Information accessible through the internet or through
another electronic medium if the department determines that
sufficient security is provided to ensure compliance with this
section.
b. The department may allow the designated agent to charge a
fee established by the department for each of the following:
(1) Authenticating a document, including preparation and
delivery of a certified copy.
(2) Accessing a record through the internet or through
another electronic medium.
(3) Providing a record to a financial institution under
subsection 1, paragraph “g”.
3. The designated agent or any other person who knowingly
releases or discloses information from the database for a
purpose other than those authorized in this section or to a
person who is not entitled to such information is guilty of a
class “D” felony.
4. Neither the state nor the department’s designated agent
shall be liable to any person for gathering, managing, or
using the information in the database in compliance with this
chapter.
5. The designated agent shall be responsible for
maintaining and securing the information in the database
provided by the department and insurers under sections 321B.3
and 321B.5.
6. An insurer acting in compliance with this chapter shall
not be liable to any person for the disclosure of information
supplied to the department or designated agent. The designated
agent shall indemnify an insurer against any loss arising from
the disclosure of information supplied to the department or
designated agent, provided the insurer supplied the information
to the department or designated agent in a manner that complies
with this chapter and rules adopted pursuant to this chapter.
Records provided by an insurer under this chapter shall be
deemed evidence of insurance and not a guarantee of insurance.
Sec. 8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Act takes effect July 1, 2019.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
This bill establishes a motor vehicle insurance verification
program to be administered by the department of transportation
(DOT). Following the appropriate competitive bidding
procedures, the DOT is required to contract with a third party
to act as the DOT’s designated agent for administration of the
program.
The bill requires the DOT to establish an advisory council
to make recommendations to the DOT on the best methods and
practices for implementing a real-time internet services model
for insurance verification, to assist in the development of
a guide for insurers detailing the data fields and other
information necessary for compliance with the bill, and to
provide an annual report to the DOT detailing the improvements
and implementation efforts relating to insurance verification
in other states for consideration in improving compliance and
operations in this state.
The designated agent is required to establish and maintain a
database containing information from insurers relating to motor
vehicle insurance coverage for registered motor vehicles, motor
vehicle identification information, personal identification
information for registered owners of motor vehicles, and any
other information provided to the designated agent by the DOT.
At least twice per month, the designated agent must update the
database and compare current motor vehicle registrations with
updated insurance information. If records in the database
indicate that a registered motor vehicle is not covered under
an owner’s policy of liability insurance, the bill requires the
designated agent to use a real-time internet services model
to determine if the registered motor vehicle is covered under
an owner’s policy of liability insurance. The files in the
database must be archived semiannually and audited by the DOT
at least annually.
If database records and the real-time internet services
model show that a registered motor vehicle is not covered under
an owner’s policy of liability insurance for three consecutive
months, the designated agent is required to send a notice
to the owner requiring the owner to respond within 15 days
by providing proof of financial liability coverage or proof
that the owner is exempt from the requirement to maintain
financial liability coverage. If the owner fails to respond,
a second notice must be sent. If the owner does not respond
to the second notice, the owner’s motor vehicle registration
must be suspended by the DOT and the owner is required to
surrender the registration plates and registration receipt for
the vehicle to the county treasurer. In order to reinstate
the registration for the vehicle, the owner must comply with
financial responsibility requirements and pay an administrative
fee of $100. The fees collected are to be used by the DOT
exclusively to offset the costs of administering the program,
including payments made to the designated agent.
The bill provides that if a motor vehicle is covered by a
form of financial liability coverage other than an insurance
policy, or if a real-time internet services model indicates a
vehicle is appropriately insured, that fact shall be noted in
the database.
The bill prohibits a person from providing false or
fraudulent information to the DOT or the DOT’s designated
agent in relation to the motor vehicle insurance verification
program. A violation of this provision is a simple
misdemeanor.
The bill requires each insurer that issues a policy to the
owner of a motor vehicle that includes motor vehicle liability
coverage, uninsured motorist coverage, underinsured motorist
coverage, or personal injury coverage to, before the 7th and
the 21st of each month, provide the DOT’s designated agent with
a record of each motor vehicle insurance policy issued by the
insurer and in effect for vehicles registered or garaged in
the state as of the date of the previous submission. Vehicles
subject to apportioned registration under Code chapter 326 are
not included in this requirement. Insurers that fail to comply
with the reporting requirement may be assessed a civil penalty
of $250 per day. However, the DOT may waive the penalty upon a
showing that the failure was inadvertent, accidental, or the
result of excusable neglect. An insurer that discloses records
to the DOT’s designated agent in a reasonable, good-faith
effort to comply with the bill is not subject to the penalty.
Information contained in the database is confidential, but
the bill provides exceptions for certain disclosures, including
disclosures to state or local government agencies and courts
for specified purposes, to individuals and certain other
authorized persons, for purposes of an accident investigation,
to law enforcement agencies and peace officers for certain
official purposes, to the state auditor, and to financial
institutions with a security interest in a motor vehicle.
The designated agent may be authorized by the DOT to provide
certified copies or electronic records, as appropriate, and to
charge a fee for the provision of records and authentication
of documents.
A person, including the designated agent, who knowingly
releases or discloses information from the database for a
purpose other than those authorized in the bill or to a person
who is not entitled to such information is guilty of a class
“D” felony.
The bill provides that the state and the DOT’s designated
agent are not liable to any person for gathering, managing, or
using the information in the database in compliance with the
bill. The bill further provides that the designated agent is
responsible for maintaining and securing the information in the
database provided by the DOT and insurers, and insurers acting
in compliance with the bill are not liable to any person for
the disclosure of information supplied to the DOT or designated
agent. The designated agent is required to indemnify an
insurer against any loss arising from a disclosure, provided
the insurer supplied the information in compliance with the
bill.
The bill takes effect July 1, 2019.