An Act providing for the issuance and display of one motor
vehicle registration plate.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. Section 8A.362, subsection 7, Code 2018, is
amended to read as follows:
7. The director shall require that a sign be placed on
each state-owned motor vehicle in a conspicuous place which
indicates its ownership by the state. This requirement
shall not apply to motor vehicles requested to be exempt by
the director or by the commissioner of public safety. All
state-owned motor vehicles shall display a registration
plates plate bearing the word “official” except motor vehicles
requested to be furnished with an ordinary plates plate by the
director or by the commissioner of public safety pursuant to
section 321.19. The director shall keep an accurate record of
the registration plates used on all state-owned motor vehicles.
This subsection shall not apply to an assigned vehicle rented
or leased pursuant to section 8A.367.
Sec. 2. Section 321.18, subsection 7, Code 2018, is amended
to read as follows:
7. Any school bus in this state used exclusively for
the transportation of pupils to and from school or a school
function or for the purposes provided in section 285.1,
subsection 1, and section 285.10, subsection 9, or used
exclusively for the transportation of children enrolled in a
federal head start program. Upon application the department
shall, without charge, issue a registration certificate and
registration plates plate. The plates plate shall be attached
to the front and rear of each bus exempt from registration
under this subsection.
Sec. 3. Section 321.19, subsection 1, paragraph c, Code
2018, is amended to read as follows:
c. However, the director of the department of administrative
services or the director of transportation may order the
issuance of a regular registration plates plate for any
exempted vehicle used by any of the following:
(1) Peace officers or federal law enforcement officers in
the enforcement of the law.
(2) Persons enforcing chapter 124 and other laws relating to
controlled substances.
(3) Persons in the department of justice, the alcoholic
beverages division of the department of commerce, disease
investigators of the Iowa department of public health, the
department of inspections and appeals, and the department of
revenue, who are regularly assigned to conduct investigations
which cannot reasonably be conducted with a vehicle displaying
an “official” state registration plates plate.
(4) Persons who are federal agents or officers regularly
assigned to conduct investigations which cannot reasonably be
conducted with a vehicle displaying an “official” registration
plates plate.
(5) Persons in the Iowa lottery authority whose regularly
assigned duties relating to security or the carrying of
lottery tickets cannot reasonably be conducted with a vehicle
displaying an “official” registration plates plate.
(6) Persons in the economic development authority
who are regularly assigned duties relating to existing
industry expansion or business attraction, and mental health
professionals or health care professionals who provide off-site
or in-home medical or mental health services to clients of
publicly funded programs.
Sec. 4. Section 321.20B, subsection 4, paragraph a,
subparagraph (3), unnumbered paragraph 1, Code 2018, is amended
to read as follows:
Issue a citation and remove the motor vehicle’s license
plates plate and registration receipt.
Sec. 5. Section 321.20B, subsection 4, paragraph a,
subparagraph (3), subparagraph division (a), Code 2018, is
amended to read as follows:
(a) Upon removing the license plates plate and registration
receipt, the peace officer shall deliver the plates plate for
destruction, as appropriate, and forward the registration
receipt and evidence of the violation, as determined by the
department, to the county treasurer of the county in which the
motor vehicle is registered.
Sec. 6. Section 321.20B, subsection 4, paragraph a,
subparagraph (4), subparagraph division (a), Code 2018, is
amended to read as follows:
(a) Issue a citation, remove the motor vehicle’s license
plates plate and registration receipt, and impound the motor
vehicle. The peace officer shall deliver the plates plate
for destruction, as appropriate, and forward the registration
receipt and evidence of the violation, as determined by the
department, to the county treasurer of the county in which the
motor vehicle is registered.
Sec. 7. Section 321.20B, subsection 4, paragraph b,
subparagraph (1), subparagraph divisions (a) and (b), Code
2018, are amended to read as follows:
(a) If the person was cited pursuant to paragraph “a”,
subparagraph (3), the owner or driver shall provide a copy of
the receipt to the county treasurer of the county in which the
motor vehicle is registered and the owner shall be assessed a
fifteen dollar administrative fee by the county treasurer who
shall issue a new license plates plate and registration to the
person after payment of the fee.
(b) If the person was cited pursuant to paragraph “a”,
subparagraph (4), the owner or driver, after the owner
provides proof of financial liability coverage to the clerk
of court, may claim the motor vehicle after such person pays
any applicable fine and the costs of towing and storage for
the motor vehicle, and the owner or driver provides a copy
of the receipt and the owner pays to the county treasurer of
the county in which the motor vehicle is registered a fifteen
dollar administrative fee, and the county treasurer shall issue
a new license plates plate and registration to the person.
Sec. 8. Section 321.20B, subsection 4, paragraph b,
subparagraph (2), subparagraph divisions (a) and (b), Code
2018, are amended to read as follows:
(a) Sign an admission of violation on the citation and
remit to the clerk of court a scheduled fine as provided in
section 805.8A, subsection 14, paragraph “f”, for a violation of
subsection 1. Upon payment of the fine to the clerk of court of
the county where the citation was issued, payment of a fifteen
dollar administrative fee to the county treasurer of the
county in which the motor vehicle is registered, and providing
proof of payment of any applicable fine and proof of financial
liability coverages to the county treasurer of the county in
which the motor vehicle is registered, the treasurer shall
issue a new license plates plate and registration to the owner.
(b) Request an appearance before the court on the matter.
If the matter goes before the court, and the owner or driver
is found guilty of a violation of subsection 1, the court
may impose a fine as provided in section 805.8A, subsection
14, paragraph “f”, for a violation of subsection 1, or the
court may order the person to perform unpaid community
service instead of the fine. Upon the payment of the fine
or the entry of the order for unpaid community service, the
person shall provide proof of payment or entry of such order
and the county treasurer of the county in which the motor
vehicle is registered shall issue a new license plates plate
and registration to the owner upon the owner providing proof
of financial liability coverage and paying a fifteen dollar
administrative fee to the county treasurer.
Sec. 9. Section 321.22, subsection 1, Code 2018, is amended
to read as follows:
1. An urban transit company or system having a franchise
to operate in any city and any regional transit system may
make application to the department, upon forms furnished by
the department, for a certificate containing a distinguishing
number and for one or more pairs of registration plates to be
attached to the front and rear of buses owned or operated by
the transit company or system.
Sec. 10. Section 321.23, subsection 3, Code 2018, is amended
to read as follows:
3. In the event an applicant for registration of a foreign
vehicle for which a certificate of title has been issued is
able to furnish evidence of being the registered owner of the
vehicle to the county treasurer of the owner’s residence,
although unable to surrender such certificate of title,
the county treasurer may issue a registration receipt and
plates plate upon receipt of the required annual registration
fee and the fee for new registration but shall not issue a
certificate of title thereto for the vehicle. Upon surrender
of the certificate of title from the foreign state, the county
treasurer shall issue a certificate of title to the owner, of
the vehicle or other person entitled thereto, of such vehicle
to the certificate of title as provided in this chapter. The
owner of a vehicle registered under this subsection shall not
be required to obtain a certificate of title in this state and
may transfer ownership of the vehicle to a motor vehicle dealer
licensed under chapter 322 if, at the time of the transfer,
the certificate of title is held by a secured party and the
dealer has forwarded to the secured party the sum necessary to
discharge the security interest pursuant to section 321.48,
subsection 1.
Sec. 11. Section 321.25, subsection 1, Code 2018, is amended
to read as follows:
1. A vehicle may be operated upon the highways of this state
without a registration plates plate for a period of forty-five
days after the date of delivery of the vehicle to the purchaser
from a dealer if a card bearing the words “registration applied
for” is attached on the rear of the vehicle. The card shall
have plainly stamped or stenciled the registration number of
the dealer from whom the vehicle was purchased and the date
of delivery of the vehicle. In addition, a dealer licensed
to sell new motor vehicles may attach the card to a new motor
vehicle delivered by the dealer to the purchaser even if the
vehicle was purchased from an out-of-state dealer and the card
shall bear the registration number of the dealer that delivered
the vehicle. A dealer shall not issue a card to a person known
to the dealer to be in possession of a registration plates
plate which may be attached to the vehicle. A dealer shall
not issue a card unless an application for registration and
certificate of title has been made by the purchaser and a
receipt issued to the purchaser of the vehicle showing the fee
paid by the person making the application. Dealers’ records
shall indicate the agency to which the fee is sent and the date
the fee is sent. The dealer shall forward the application by
the purchaser to the county treasurer or state office within
thirty calendar days from the date of delivery of the vehicle.
However, if the vehicle is subject to a security interest
and has been offered for sale pursuant to section 321.48,
subsection 1, the dealer shall forward the application by the
purchaser to the county treasurer or state office within thirty
calendar days from the date of the delivery of the vehicle to
the purchaser.
Sec. 12. Section 321.26, subsection 2, Code 2018, is amended
to read as follows:
2. The county treasurer may adjust the renewal or expiration
date of vehicles when deemed necessary to equalize the number
of vehicles registered in each twelve-month period or for the
administrative efficiency of the county treasurer’s office.
The adjustment shall be accomplished by delivery of a written
notice to the vehicle owner of the adjustment and allowance of
a credit for the remaining months of the unused portion of the
annual registration fee, rounded to the nearest whole dollar,
which amount shall be deducted from the annual registration
fee due at the time of registration. Upon receipt of the
notification the owner shall, within thirty days, surrender the
registration card and registration plates plate to the county
treasurer of the county where the vehicle is registered, except
that the registration plates plate shall not be surrendered
if a validation stickers sticker or other emblems are emblem
is used to designate the month and year of expiration of
registration. Upon payment of the annual registration fee,
less the credit allowed for the remaining months of the
unused portion of the annual registration fee, the county
treasurer shall issue a new registration card and registration
plates plate, validation stickers sticker, or emblems emblem
which indicate indicates the month and year of expiration of
registration.
Sec. 13. Section 321.34, subsections 1, 2, and 3, Code 2018,
are amended to read as follows:
1. Plates Plate issued. The county treasurer upon receiving
application, accompanied by proper fee, for registration of a
vehicle shall issue to the owner one registration plate for
a motorcycle, motorized bicycle, autocycle, truck tractor,
trailer, or semitrailer and two registration plates for every
other motor vehicle. The registration plates plate, including
any special registration plates plate, shall be assigned
to the owner of a vehicle. When the owner of a registered
vehicle transfers or assigns ownership of the vehicle to
another person, the owner shall remove the registration plates
plate from the vehicle. The owner shall forward the plates
plate to the county treasurer where the vehicle is registered
or the owner may have the plates plate assigned to another
vehicle within thirty days after transfer, upon payment of the
fees required by law. The owner shall immediately affix the
registration plates plate retained by the owner to another
vehicle owned or acquired by the owner, providing the owner
complies with section 321.46. The department shall adopt rules
providing for the assignment of a registration plates plate to
the transferee of a vehicle for which a credit is allowed under
section 321.46, subsection 6.
2. Validation stickers.
a. In lieu of issuing a new registration plates plate
each registration year for a vehicle renewing registration,
the department may reassign the registration plates plate
previously issued to the vehicle and may adopt and prescribe
an annual validation sticker indicating payment of annual
registration fees. The department shall issue one validation
sticker for each set of registration plates plate. The
sticker shall specify the month and year of expiration of the
registration plates plate. The sticker shall be displayed
only on the rear registration plate, except that the sticker
shall be displayed on the front registration plate of a truck
tractor.
b. The state department of transportation shall adopt rules
to provide for the placement of the motor vehicle registration
validation sticker.
3. Radio operators plates. The owner of an automobile,
motorcycle, trailer, or motor truck who holds an amateur radio
license issued by the federal communications commission may,
upon written application to the county treasurer accompanied
by a fee of five dollars, order a special registration plates
plate bearing the call letters authorized the radio station
covered by the person’s amateur radio license. When received
by the county treasurer, such special registration plates
plate shall be issued to the applicant in exchange for the
registration plates plate previously issued to the person. Not
more than one set of special registration plates plate may be
issued to an applicant. Said fee shall be in addition to and
not in lieu of the fee for a regular registration plates plate.
Special A special registration plates plate must be surrendered
upon expiration of the owner’s amateur radio license and the
owner shall thereupon be entitled to the owner’s regular
registration plates plate. The county treasurer shall validate
special plates in the same manner as regular registration
plates, upon payment of five dollars in addition to the regular
annual registration fee.
Sec. 14. Section 321.34, subsection 5, paragraph a, Code
2018, is amended to read as follows:
a. Upon application and the payment of a fee of twenty-five
dollars, the director may issue to the owner of a motor
vehicle registered in this state or a trailer or travel trailer
registered in this state, a personalized registration plates
plate marked with up to seven initials, letters, or combination
of numerals and letters requested by the owner. However,
personalized registration plates for autocycles, motorcycles,
and motorized bicycles shall be marked with no more than six
initials, letters, or combinations of numerals and letters.
Upon receipt of the personalized registration plates plate,
the applicant shall surrender the regular registration plates
plate to the county treasurer. The fee for issuance of the
personalized registration plates plate shall be in addition to
the regular annual registration fee.
Sec. 15. Section 321.34, subsection 6, Code 2018, is amended
to read as follows:
6. Sample vehicle registration plates. Vehicle A vehicle
registration plates plate displaying the general design of
a regular registration plates plate, with the word “sample”
displayed on the plate, may be furnished to any person upon
payment of a fee of three dollars, except that such plates may
be furnished to governmental agencies without cost. Sample A
sample registration plates plate shall not be attached to a
vehicle moved on the highways of this state.
Sec. 16. Section 321.34, subsection 7, paragraphs a and e,
Code 2018, are amended to read as follows:
a. Upon application and payment of the proper fees, the
director may issue to the owner of a motor vehicle subject
to registration under section 321.109, subsection 1, motor
truck, motor home, multipurpose vehicle, trailer over two
thousand pounds, or travel trailer registered in this state, a
collegiate registration plates plate created pursuant to this
subsection. Upon receipt of the collegiate registration plates
plate, the applicant shall surrender the regular registration
plates plate to the county treasurer.
e. A collegiate registration plate shall not be issued if
its combination of alphanumeric characters are identical to
those contained on a current personalized registration plate
issued under subsection 5. However, the owner of a motor
vehicle who has a personalized registration plate issued for
the motor vehicle may, after proper application and payment
of fees, be issued a collegiate registration plate containing
the same alphanumeric characters as those on the personalized
plate. Upon receipt of the collegiate registration plates
plate, the owner shall surrender the personalized registration
plates plate to the county treasurer.
Sec. 17. Section 321.34, subsection 7A, paragraphs b and c,
Code 2018, are amended to read as follows:
b. Upon application and payment of the proper fees, the
director may issue to the owner of a motor vehicle subject
to registration under section 321.109, subsection 1, motor
truck, motor home, multipurpose vehicle, trailer over two
thousand pounds, or travel trailer registered in this state,
a collegiate registration plates plate created pursuant to
this subsection. The fee for the issuance of a collegiate
registration plates plate is twenty-five dollars, which fee
is in addition to the regular annual registration fee for the
vehicle. An applicant may obtain a personalized collegiate
registration plate upon payment of the additional fee for a
personalized plate as provided in subsection 5 in addition to
the collegiate plate fee and the regular registration fee. The
county treasurer shall validate collegiate registration plates
issued under this subsection in the same manner as regular
registration plates, upon payment of five dollars in addition
to the regular annual registration fee. Upon receipt of the
collegiate registration plates plate, the applicant shall
surrender the regular registration plates plate to the county
treasurer.
c. A personalized collegiate registration plate shall
not be issued if its combination of alphanumeric characters
are identical to those contained on a current personalized
registration plate issued under subsection 5. However, the
owner of a motor vehicle who has a personalized registration
plate issued for the motor vehicle may, after proper
application and payment of fees, be issued a collegiate
registration plate containing the same alphanumeric characters
as those on the personalized plate. Upon receipt of the
collegiate registration plates plate, the owner shall surrender
the personalized registration plates plate to the county
treasurer.
Sec. 18. Section 321.34, subsections 8, 8A, and 9, Code
2018, are amended to read as follows:
8. Medal of honor plates.
a. The owner of a motor vehicle subject to registration
under section 321.109, subsection 1, autocycle, motorcycle,
trailer, or motor truck who has been awarded the medal of
honor may, upon written application to the department, order a
special registration plates plate which shall be red, white,
and blue in color and shall bear an emblem of the medal of
honor and an identifying number. Each applicant applying for
a special registration plates plate under this subsection may
order only one set of registration plates plate under this
subsection. The application is subject to approval by the
department and the special registration plates plate shall
be issued at no charge to the applicant in exchange for the
registration plates plate previously issued to the person.
A person who is issued a special plates plate under this
subsection is exempt from payment of any annual registration
fee for the motor vehicle bearing the special plates plate.
The department shall validate the special plates in the same
manner as regular registration plates are validated under this
section. The department shall not issue special registration
plates until service organizations in the state have furnished
the department either the special dies or the cost of the
special dies necessary for the manufacture of the special
registration plate.
b. The surviving spouse of a person who was issued a special
plates plate under this subsection may continue to use the
special plates plate subject to registration of the special
plates plate in the surviving spouse’s name. If the surviving
spouse remarries, the surviving spouse shall return the special
plates plate to the department and the department shall issue a
regular registration plates plate to the surviving spouse.
8A. Ex-prisoner of war special plates.
a. The owner of a motor vehicle subject to registration
under section 321.109, subsection 1, autocycle, motorcycle,
trailer, or motor truck who was a prisoner of war during a
time of military conflict may, upon written application to
the department, order only one set of special registration
plates plate with an ex-prisoner of war processed emblem. The
emblem shall be designed by the department in cooperation
with the adjutant general and shall signify that the owner
was a prisoner of war as described in this subsection. The
application is subject to approval by the department, in
consultation with the adjutant general. The special plates
plate shall be issued at no charge and are is subject to
an annual registration fee of fifteen dollars. The county
treasurer shall validate the special plates in the same
manner as regular registration plates are validated under this
section.
b. The surviving spouse of a person who was issued a special
plates plate under this subsection may continue to use or apply
for and use the special plates plate subject to registration
of the special plates plate in the surviving spouse’s name and
upon payment of the annual registration fee. If the surviving
spouse remarries, the surviving spouse shall return the special
plates plate to the department and the department shall issue a
regular registration plates plate to the surviving spouse.
9. Leased vehicles. Registration plates A registration
plate under this section, including a disabled veteran plates
plate specified in section 321.105, may be issued to the lessee
of a motor vehicle if the lessee provides evidence of a lease
for a period of more than sixty days and if the lessee complies
with the requirements, under this section, for issuance of the
specific registration plates plate.
Sec. 19. Section 321.34, subsection 10, paragraphs a, b, and
d, Code 2018, are amended to read as follows:
a. An owner referred to in subsection 12 who is a current
or retired member of a paid or volunteer fire department may,
upon written application to the department, order a special
registration plates plate, designed by the department in
cooperation with representatives designated by the Iowa fire
fighters’ associations, which signify that the applicant
is a current or retired member of a paid or volunteer fire
department.
b. The application shall be approved by the department in
consultation with representatives designated by the Iowa fire
fighters’ associations, and the special registration plates
plate shall be issued to the applicant in exchange for the
registration plates plate previously issued to the person. An
applicant who is the owner of a business-trade truck or special
truck shall not be issued a special fire fighter registration
plates plate for more than one vehicle. The fee for the
special plates plate is twenty-five dollars which shall be
paid in addition to the regular annual registration fee. The
department shall validate the special plates in the same manner
as regular registration plates are validated under this section
at the regular annual registration fee.
d. For purposes of this subsection, a person is considered
to be retired if the person is recognized by the chief of the
fire department where the individual served, and on record,
as officially retired from the fire department. Special A
special registration plates plate with a fire fighter emblem
shall be surrendered, as provided in subsection 12, in exchange
for a regular registration plates plate upon termination of
the motor vehicle owner’s membership in the paid or volunteer
fire department, unless the person is a retired member in good
standing.
Sec. 20. Section 321.34, subsection 10A, paragraph a, Code
2018, is amended to read as follows:
a. The owner of a motor vehicle referred to in subsection
12 who is a current member of a paid or volunteer emergency
medical services agency may, upon written application to
the department, order a special registration plates plate,
designed by the department in cooperation with representatives
designated by the Iowa emergency medical services association,
which plates signify signifies that the applicant is a current
member of a paid or volunteer emergency medical services
agency. The application shall be approved by the department,
in consultation with representatives designated by the Iowa
emergency medical services association, and the special
registration plates plate shall be issued to the applicant
in exchange for the registration plates plate previously
issued to the person. The fee for the special plates plate is
twenty-five dollars which is in addition to the regular annual
registration fee. The department shall validate the special
plates in the same manner as regular registration plates are
validated under this section at the regular annual registration
fee.
Sec. 21. Section 321.34, subsection 11, paragraphs a, c, and
d, Code 2018, are amended to read as follows:
a. Upon application and payment of the proper fees, the
director may issue a natural resources plates plate to the
owner of a motor vehicle subject to registration under section
321.109, subsection 1, autocycle, motor truck, motor home,
multipurpose vehicle, motorcycle, trailer, or travel trailer.
c. (1) The special natural resources fee for a
letter-number designated natural resources plates plate
is forty-five dollars. The fee for a personalized natural
resources plates plate is forty-five dollars which shall be
paid in addition to the special natural resources fee of
forty-five dollars. The fees collected by the director under
this subsection shall be paid monthly to the treasurer of
state and deposited in the road use tax fund. The treasurer
of state shall credit monthly from the statutory allocations
fund created under section 321.145, subsection 2, to the Iowa
resources enhancement and protection fund created pursuant to
section 455A.18, the amount of the special natural resources
fees collected in the previous month for the natural resources
plates.
(2) From the moneys credited to the Iowa resources
enhancement and protection fund under subparagraph (1), ten
dollars of the fee collected for each natural resources plate
issued, and fifteen dollars from each renewal fee, shall be
allocated to the department of natural resources wildlife
bureau to be used for nongame wildlife programs.
d. Upon receipt of the special registration plates plate,
the applicant shall surrender the current registration plates
plate to the county treasurer. The county treasurer shall
validate the special registration plates in the same manner as
regular registration plates are validated under this section.
The annual special natural resources fee for a letter-number
designated plates plate is twenty-five dollars which shall
be paid in addition to the regular annual registration fee.
The annual fee for a personalized natural resources plates
plate is five dollars which shall be paid in addition to the
annual special natural resources fee and the regular annual
registration fee. The annual special natural resources fee
shall be credited as provided under paragraph “c”.
Sec. 22. Section 321.34, subsection 11A, paragraphs a, c,
and d, Code 2018, are amended to read as follows:
a. Upon application and payment of the proper fees, the
director may issue a “love our kids” plates plate to the owner
of a motor vehicle subject to registration under section
321.109, subsection 1, autocycle, motor truck, motor home,
multipurpose vehicle, motorcycle, trailer, or travel trailer.
c. The special fee for a letter-number designated love
our kids plates plate is thirty-five dollars. The fee for a
personalized love our kids plates plate is twenty-five dollars,
which shall be paid in addition to the special love our kids
fee of thirty-five dollars. The fees collected by the director
under this subsection shall be paid monthly to the treasurer
of state and deposited in the road use tax fund. The treasurer
of state shall transfer monthly from the statutory allocations
fund created under section 321.145, subsection 2, to the Iowa
department of public health the amount of the special fees
collected in the previous month for the love our kids plates.
Notwithstanding section 8.33, moneys transferred under this
subsection shall not revert to the general fund of the state.
d. Upon receipt of the special registration plates plate,
the applicant shall surrender the current registration plates
plate to the county treasurer. The county treasurer shall
validate the special registration plates in the same manner as
regular registration plates are validated under this section.
The annual special love our kids fee for a letter-number
designated plates plate is ten dollars, which shall be paid in
addition to the regular annual registration fee. The annual
fee for a personalized love our kids plates plate is five
dollars, which shall be paid in addition to the annual special
love our kids fee and the regular annual registration fee. The
annual love our kids fee shall be credited as provided under
paragraph “c”.
Sec. 23. Section 321.34, subsection 11B, paragraphs a, c,
and d, Code 2018, are amended to read as follows:
a. Upon application and payment of the proper fees, the
director may issue a “motorcycle rider education” plates plate
to the owner of a motor vehicle subject to registration under
section 321.109, subsection 1, autocycle, motor truck, motor
home, multipurpose vehicle, motorcycle, trailer, or travel
trailer.
c. The special fee for a letter-number designated motorcycle
rider education plates plate is thirty-five dollars. The fee
for a personalized motorcycle rider education plates plate is
twenty-five dollars, which shall be paid in addition to the
special motorcycle rider education fee of thirty-five dollars.
The fees collected by the director under this subsection shall
be paid monthly to the treasurer of state and deposited in
the road use tax fund. The treasurer of state shall transfer
monthly from the statutory allocations fund created under
section 321.145, subsection 2, to the department for use in
accordance with section 321.179, the amount of the special
fees collected in the previous month for the motorcycle rider
education plates.
d. Upon receipt of the special registration plates plate,
the applicant shall surrender the current registration plates
plate to the county treasurer. The county treasurer shall
validate the special registration plates in the same manner as
regular registration plates are validated under this section.
The annual special motorcycle rider education fee for a
letter-number designated plates plate is ten dollars, which
shall be paid in addition to the regular annual registration
fee. The annual fee for a personalized motorcycle rider
education plates plate is five dollars, which shall be paid
in addition to the annual special motorcycle rider education
fee and the regular annual registration fee. The annual
motorcycle rider education fee shall be credited as provided
under paragraph “c”.
Sec. 24. Section 321.34, subsection 12, paragraphs a and b,
Code 2018, are amended to read as follows:
a. The owner of a motor vehicle subject to registration
pursuant to section 321.109, subsection 1, autocycle, motor
truck, motor home, multipurpose vehicle, motorcycle, trailer,
or travel trailer may, upon written application to the
department, order a special registration plates plate with a
distinguishing processed emblem as authorized by this section
or as approved by the department. The fee for the issuance of
a special registration plates plate is twenty-five dollars for
each vehicle, unless otherwise provided by this section, which
fee is in addition to the regular annual registration fee. The
county treasurer shall validate special registration plates
with a distinguishing processed emblem in the same manner as
regular registration plates, upon payment of five dollars in
addition to the regular annual registration fee.
b. Upon receipt of a special registration plate with a
distinguishing processed emblem as authorized by this section
or as approved by the department, the applicant shall surrender
the regular registration plates plate to the county treasurer.
An applicant no longer eligible for a special registration
plate shall surrender the special vehicle registration plates
plate to the county treasurer for issuance of a regular
registration plates plate.
Sec. 25. Section 321.34, subsection 12A, Code 2018, is
amended to read as follows:
12A. Special registration plates —— armed forces services.
a. An owner of a vehicle referred to in subsection 12 who
applies for any type of special registration plates plate
associated with service in the United States armed forces shall
be issued one set of the special registration plates plate at
no charge, but shall be subject to the annual registration
fee of fifteen dollars, if the owner is eligible for, but has
relinquished to the department or the county treasurer or has
not been issued, an ex-prisoner of war or legion of merit
special registration plates plate under this section.
b. An owner of a vehicle referred to in subsection 12 who
applies for any type of special registration plates plate
associated with service in the United States armed forces
shall be issued one set of the special registration plates
plate at no charge and subject to no annual registration fee
if the owner is eligible for, but has relinquished to the
department or the county treasurer or has not been issued, a
medal of honor registration plates plate under subsection 8
or a disabled veteran registration plates plate under section
321.105.
c. The owner shall provide the appropriate information
regarding the owner’s eligibility for any of the special
registration plates described in paragraph “a” or “b”, and
regarding the owner’s eligibility for the special registration
plates plate for which the owner has applied, as required by
the department.
d. The surviving spouse of a person who was issued a
special plates plate under this subsection may continue to
use the special plates plate subject to registration of the
special plates plate in the surviving spouse’s name and upon
payment of the same annual registration fee, if applicable.
If the surviving spouse remarries, the surviving spouse shall
return the special plates plate to the department and the
department shall issue a regular registration plates plate to
the surviving spouse.
Sec. 26. Section 321.34, subsection 13, paragraph a,
subparagraph (1), Code 2018, is amended to read as follows:
(1) The owner of a motor vehicle subject to registration
pursuant to section 321.109, subsection 1, autocycle, motor
truck, motor home, multipurpose vehicle, motorcycle, trailer,
or travel trailer may upon request be issued a special
registration plates plate that contain contains a space
reserved for the placement of an organization decal. If the
special plates are plate is requested at the time of initial
application for registration and certificate of title for
the vehicle, no special plate fee is required other than the
regular annual registration fee for the vehicle. If the
special plates are plate is requested as a replacement plates
plate, the owner shall surrender the current regular or special
registration plates plate in exchange for the special plates
plate and shall pay a replacement plate fee of five dollars.
The county treasurer shall validate special plates with an
organization decal in the same manner as regular plates, upon
payment of the annual registration fee.
Sec. 27. Section 321.34, subsections 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20, 20A, and 20B, Code 2018, are amended to read as follows:
14. Persons with disabilities special plates. An owner
referred to in subsection 12 or an owner of a trailer used to
transport a wheelchair who is a person with a disability, or
who is the parent or guardian of a child who resides with the
parent or guardian owner and who is a person with a disability,
as defined in section 321L.1, may, upon written application to
the department, order a special registration plates plate with
a persons with disabilities processed emblem designed by the
department bearing the international symbol of accessibility.
The special registration plates plate with a persons with
disabilities processed emblem shall only be issued if the
application is accompanied with a statement from a physician
licensed under chapter 148 or 149, a physician assistant
licensed under chapter 148C, an advanced registered nurse
practitioner licensed under chapter 152, or a chiropractor
licensed under chapter 151, written on the physician’s,
physician assistant’s, nurse practitioner’s, or chiropractor’s
stationery, stating the nature of the applicant’s or the
applicant’s child’s disability and such additional information
as required by rules adopted by the department, including proof
of residency of a child who is a person with a disability. If
the application is approved by the department, the special
registration plates plate with a persons with disabilities
processed emblem shall be issued to the applicant. There
shall be no fee in addition to the regular annual registration
fee for the special registration plates plate with a persons
with disabilities processed emblem. The authorization for
a special registration plates plate with a persons with
disabilities processed emblem shall not be renewed without
the applicant furnishing evidence to the department that
the owner of the vehicle or the owner’s child is still a
person with a disability as defined in section 321L.1. An
owner who has a child who is a person with a disability shall
provide satisfactory evidence to the department that the child
with a disability continues to reside with the owner. The
registration plates plate with a persons with disabilities
processed emblem shall be surrendered in exchange for a regular
registration plates plate as provided in subsection 12 when the
owner of the vehicle or the owner’s child no longer qualifies
as a person with a disability as defined in section 321L.1 or
when the owner’s child who is a person with a disability no
longer resides with the owner.
15. Legion of merit special plates.
a. The owner of a motor vehicle subject to registration
under section 321.109, subsection 1, autocycle, motorcycle,
trailer, or motor truck who has been awarded the legion of
merit shall be issued one set of special registration plates
plate with a legion of merit processed emblem, upon written
application to the department and presentation of satisfactory
proof of the award of the legion of merit as established
by the Congress of the United States. The emblem shall be
designed by the department in cooperation with the adjutant
general and shall signify that the owner was awarded the legion
of merit. The application is subject to approval by the
department, in consultation with the adjutant general. The
special plates plate shall be issued at no charge and are is
subject to an annual registration fee of fifteen dollars. The
county treasurer shall validate the special plates in the same
manner as regular registration plates are validated under this
section.
b. The surviving spouse of a person who was issued a special
plates plate under this subsection may continue to use or apply
for and use the special plates plate subject to registration
of the special plates plate in the surviving spouse’s name and
upon payment of the annual registration fee. If the surviving
spouse remarries, the surviving spouse shall return the special
plates plate to the department and the department shall issue a
regular registration plates plate to the surviving spouse.
16. National guard special plates.
a. An owner referred to in subsection 12 who is a
member of the national guard, as defined in chapter 29A,
may, upon written application to the department, order a
special registration plates plate with a national guard
processed emblem with the emblem designed by the department in
cooperation with the adjutant general which emblem signifies
that the applicant is a member of the national guard. The
application shall be approved by the department in consultation
with the adjutant general. The special plate fees collected by
the director under subsection 12, paragraph “a”, from the annual
validation of letter-number designated national guard plates,
and subsection 12, paragraph “c”, from the issuance and annual
validation of personalized national guard plates shall be paid
monthly to the treasurer of state and deposited in the road
use tax fund. The treasurer of state shall transfer monthly
from the statutory allocations fund created under section
321.145, subsection 2, to the veterans license fee fund created
in section 35A.11 the amount of the special fees collected
under subsection 12, paragraph “a”, in the previous month
for national guard plates. Special A special registration
plates plate with a national guard processed emblem shall be
surrendered, as provided in subsection 12, in exchange for
a regular registration plates plate upon termination of the
owner’s membership in the active national guard.
b. Notwithstanding subsection 12, paragraph “a”, an owner
who is approved for a special registration plates plate under
this subsection shall be issued one set of special registration
plates plate with a national guard processed emblem at no
charge.
c. The surviving spouse of a person who was issued a special
plates plate under this subsection may continue to use or apply
for and use the special plates plate subject to registration
of the special plates plate in the surviving spouse’s name
and upon payment of the annual five-dollar special plate fee
and the regular annual registration fee for the vehicle. If
the surviving spouse remarries, the surviving spouse shall
return the special plates plate to the department and the
department shall issue a regular registration plates plate to
the surviving spouse.
17. Pearl Harbor special plates.
a. An owner referred to in subsection 12 who was at Pearl
Harbor, Hawaii, as a member of the armed services of the United
States on December 7, 1941, may, upon written application to
the department, order a special registration plates plate with
a Pearl Harbor processed emblem. The emblem shall be designed
by the department in consultation with service organizations.
The application is subject to approval by the department. The
special plate fees collected by the director under subsection
12, paragraph “a”, from the annual validation of letter-number
designated Pearl Harbor plates, and subsection 12, paragraph
“c”, from the issuance and annual validation of personalized
Pearl Harbor plates shall be paid monthly to the treasurer of
state and deposited in the road use tax fund. The treasurer
of state shall transfer monthly from the statutory allocations
fund created under section 321.145, subsection 2, to the
veterans license fee fund created in section 35A.11 the amount
of the special fees collected under subsection 12, paragraph
“a”, in the previous month for Pearl Harbor plates.
b. Notwithstanding subsection 12, paragraph “a”, an owner
who is approved for a special registration plates plate under
this subsection shall be issued one set of special registration
plates plate with a Pearl Harbor processed emblem at no charge.
c. The surviving spouse of a person who was issued a special
plates plate under this subsection may continue to use or apply
for and use the special plates plate subject to registration
of the special plates plate in the surviving spouse’s name
and upon payment of the annual five-dollar special plate fee
and the regular annual registration fee for the vehicle. If
the surviving spouse remarries, the surviving spouse shall
return the special plates plate to the department and the
department shall issue a regular registration plates plate to
the surviving spouse.
18. Purple heart special plates.
a. An owner referred to in subsection 12 who was awarded a
purple heart medal by the United States government for wounds
received in military or naval combat against an armed enemy
of the United States may, upon written application to the
department and presentation of satisfactory proof of the award
of the purple heart medal, order a special registration plates
plate with a purple heart processed emblem. The design of
the emblem shall include a representation of a purple heart
medal and ribbon. The application is subject to approval by
the department in consultation with the adjutant general. The
special plate fees collected by the director under subsection
12, paragraph “a”, from the annual validation of letter-number
designated purple heart plates, and subsection 12, paragraph
“c”, from the issuance and annual validation of personalized
purple heart plates shall be paid monthly to the treasurer of
state and deposited in the road use tax fund. The treasurer
of state shall transfer monthly from the statutory allocations
fund created under section 321.145, subsection 2, to the
veterans license fee fund created in section 35A.11 the amount
of the special fees collected under subsection 12, paragraph
“a”, in the previous month for purple heart plates.
b. Notwithstanding subsection 12, paragraph “a”, an owner
who is approved for a special registration plates plate under
this subsection shall be issued one set of special registration
plates plate with a purple heart processed emblem at no charge.
c. The surviving spouse of a person who was issued a special
plates plate under this subsection may continue to use or apply
for and use the special plates plate subject to registration
of the special plates plate in the surviving spouse’s name
and upon payment of the annual five-dollar special plate fee
and the regular annual registration fee for the vehicle. If
the surviving spouse remarries, the surviving spouse shall
return the special plates plate to the department and the
department shall issue a regular registration plates plate to
the surviving spouse.
19. United States armed forces retired special plates.
a. An owner referred to in subsection 12 who is a retired
member of the United States armed forces may, upon written
application to the department and upon presentation of
satisfactory proof of membership, order a special registration
plates plate with a United States armed forces retired
processed emblem. The emblem shall be designed by the
department in consultation with service organizations. The
application is subject to approval by the department. For
purposes of this subsection, a person is considered to be
retired if the person is recognized by the United States armed
forces as retired from the United States armed forces. The
special plate fees collected by the director under subsection
12, paragraph “a”, from the annual validation of letter-number
designated armed forces retired plates, and subsection 12,
paragraph “c”, from the issuance and annual validation of
personalized armed forces retired plates shall be paid monthly
to the treasurer of state and deposited in the road use tax
fund. The treasurer of state shall transfer monthly from the
statutory allocations fund created under section 321.145,
subsection 2, to the veterans license fee fund created in
section 35A.11 the amount of the special fees collected under
subsection 12, paragraph “a”, in the previous month for armed
forces retired plates.
b. Notwithstanding subsection 12, paragraph “a”, an owner
who is approved for a special registration plates plate under
this subsection shall be issued one set of special registration
plates plate with an armed forces retired processed emblem at
no charge.
c. The surviving spouse of a person who was issued a special
plates plate under this subsection may continue to use or apply
for and use the special plates plate subject to registration
of the special plates plate in the surviving spouse’s name
and upon payment of the annual five-dollar special plate fee
and the regular annual registration fee for the vehicle. If
the surviving spouse remarries, the surviving spouse shall
return the special plates plate to the department and the
department shall issue a regular registration plates plate to
the surviving spouse.
20. Silver or bronze star plates.
a. An owner referred to in subsection 12 who was awarded a
silver or a bronze star by the United States government, may,
upon written application to the department and presentation of
satisfactory proof of the award of the silver or bronze star,
order a special registration plates plate with a silver or
bronze star processed emblem. The emblem shall be designed by
the department in consultation with the adjutant general. The
special plate fees collected by the director under subsection
12, paragraph “a”, from the annual validation of letter-number
designated silver star and bronze star plates, and subsection
12, paragraph “c”, from the issuance and annual validation of
personalized silver star and bronze star plates shall be paid
monthly to the treasurer of state and deposited in the road use
tax fund. The treasurer of state shall transfer monthly from
the statutory allocations fund created under section 321.145,
subsection 2, to the veterans license fee fund created in
section 35A.11 the amount of the special fees collected under
subsection 12, paragraph “a”, in the previous month for silver
star and bronze star plates.
b. Notwithstanding subsection 12, paragraph “a”, an owner
who is approved for a special registration plates plate under
this subsection shall be issued one set of special registration
plates plate with a silver star or bronze star processed emblem
at no charge.
c. The surviving spouse of a person who was issued a special
plates plate under this subsection may continue to use or apply
for and use the special plates plate subject to registration
of the special plates plate in the surviving spouse’s name
and upon payment of the annual five-dollar special plate fee
and the regular annual registration fee for the vehicle. If
the surviving spouse remarries, the surviving spouse shall
return the special plates plate to the department and the
department shall issue a regular registration plates plate to
the surviving spouse.
20A. Distinguished service, navy, or air force cross plates.
a. An owner referred to in subsection 12 who was awarded
a distinguished service cross, a navy cross, or an air force
cross by the United States government may, upon written
application to the department and presentation of satisfactory
proof of the award, order a special registration plates plate
with a distinguished service cross, navy cross, or air force
cross processed emblem. The emblem shall be designed by the
department in consultation with the adjutant general. The
special plate fees collected by the director under subsection
12, paragraph “a”, from the annual validation of letter-number
designated distinguished service cross, navy cross, and air
force cross plates, and subsection 12, paragraph “c”, from the
issuance and annual validation of personalized distinguished
service cross, navy cross, and air force cross plates shall
be paid monthly to the treasurer of state and deposited in
the road use tax fund. The treasurer of state shall transfer
monthly from the statutory allocations fund created under
section 321.145, subsection 2, to the veterans license fee
fund created in section 35A.11 the amount of the special fees
collected under subsection 12, paragraph “a”, in the previous
month for distinguished service cross, navy cross, and air
force cross plates.
b. Notwithstanding subsection 12, paragraph “a”, an owner
who is approved for a special registration plates plate under
this subsection shall be issued one set of special registration
plates plate with a distinguished service cross, navy cross, or
air force cross processed emblem at no charge.
c. The surviving spouse of a person who was issued a special
plates plate under this subsection may continue to use or apply
for and use the special plates plate subject to registration
of the special plates plate in the surviving spouse’s name
and upon payment of the annual five-dollar special plate fee
and the regular annual registration fee for the vehicle. If
the surviving spouse remarries, the surviving spouse shall
return the special plates plate to the department and the
department shall issue a regular registration plates plate to
the surviving spouse.
20B. Soldier’s, navy and marine corps, or airman’s medal
plates.
a. An owner referred to in subsection 12 who was awarded
a soldier’s medal, a navy and marine corps medal, or an
airman’s medal by the United States government may, upon
written application to the department and presentation of
satisfactory proof of the award, order a special registration
plates plate with a soldier’s medal, navy and marine corps
medal, or airman’s medal processed emblem. The emblem shall be
designed by the department in consultation with the adjutant
general. The special plate fees collected by the director
under subsection 12, paragraph “a”, from the annual validation
of letter-number designated soldier’s medal, navy and marine
corps medal, and airman’s medal plates, and subsection 12,
paragraph “c”, from the issuance and annual validation of
personalized soldier’s medal, navy and marine corps medal, and
airman’s medal plates shall be paid monthly to the treasurer
of state and deposited in the road use tax fund. The treasurer
of state shall transfer monthly from the statutory allocations
fund created under section 321.145, subsection 2, to the
veterans license fee fund created in section 35A.11 the amount
of the special fees collected under subsection 12, paragraph
“a”, in the previous month for soldier’s medal, navy and marine
corps medal, and airman’s medal plates.
b. Notwithstanding subsection 12, paragraph “a”, an owner
who is approved for a special registration plates plate under
this subsection shall be issued one set of special registration
plates plate with a soldier’s medal, navy and marine corps
medal, or airman’s medal processed emblem at no charge.
c. The surviving spouse of a person who was issued a special
plates plate under this subsection may continue to use or apply
for and use the special plates plate subject to registration
of the special plates plate in the surviving spouse’s name
and upon payment of the annual five-dollar special plate fee
and the regular annual registration fee for the vehicle. If
the surviving spouse remarries, the surviving spouse shall
return the special plates plate to the department and the
department shall issue a regular registration plates plate to
the surviving spouse.
Sec. 28. Section 321.34, subsection 20C, paragraphs b, c,
and d, Code 2018, are amended to read as follows:
b. An owner referred to in subsection 12 who was awarded a
combat infantryman badge, combat action badge, combat action
ribbon, air force combat action medal, or combat medical badge
by the United States government may, upon written application
to the department and presentation of satisfactory proof of
the award, order a special registration plates plate with a
combat infantryman badge, combat action badge, combat action
ribbon, air force combat action medal, or combat medical badge
processed emblem. The special plate fees collected by the
director under subsection 12, paragraph “a”, from the annual
validation of letter-number designated combat infantryman
badge, combat action badge, combat action ribbon, air force
combat action medal, and combat medical badge plates, and
subsection 12, paragraph “c”, from the issuance and annual
validation of personalized combat infantryman badge, combat
action badge, combat action ribbon, air force combat action
medal, and combat medical badge plates shall be paid monthly
to the treasurer of state and deposited in the road use tax
fund. The treasurer of state shall transfer monthly from the
statutory allocations fund created under section 321.145,
subsection 2, to the veterans license fee fund created in
section 35A.11 the amount of the special fees collected under
subsection 12, paragraph “a”, in the previous month for combat
infantryman badge, combat action badge, combat action ribbon,
air force combat action medal, and combat medical badge plates.
c. Notwithstanding subsection 12, paragraph “a”, an owner
who is approved for a special registration plates plate under
this subsection shall be issued one set of special registration
plates plate with a combat infantryman badge, combat action
badge, combat action ribbon, air force combat action medal,
or combat medical badge distinguishing processed emblem at no
charge.
d. The surviving spouse of a person who was issued a special
plates plate under this subsection may continue to use or apply
for and use the special plates plate subject to registration
of the special plates plate in the surviving spouse’s name
and upon payment of the annual five-dollar special plate fee
and the regular annual registration fee for the vehicle. If
the surviving spouse remarries, the surviving spouse shall
return the special plates plate to the department and the
department shall issue a regular registration plates plate to
the surviving spouse.
Sec. 29. Section 321.34, subsection 21, paragraphs a and b,
Code 2018, are amended to read as follows:
a. An owner referred to in subsection 12 may, upon written
application to the department, order a special registration
plates plate with an Iowa heritage emblem. The emblem shall
contain a picture of the American gothic house and the words
“Iowa Heritage” and shall be designed by the department in
consultation with the state historical society of Iowa.
b. The special Iowa heritage fee for a letter-number
designated plates plate is thirty-five dollars. The
special fee for a personalized Iowa heritage plates plate is
twenty-five dollars which shall be paid in addition to the
special fee of thirty-five dollars. The annual special Iowa
heritage fee is ten dollars for a letter-number designated
registration plates plate and is fifteen dollars for a
personalized registration plates plate which shall be paid in
addition to the regular annual registration fee.
Sec. 30. Section 321.34, subsections 22, 23, and 24, Code
2018, are amended to read as follows:
22. Education plates.
a. An owner referred to in subsection 12, upon written
application to the department, may order a special registration
plates plate with an education emblem. The education emblem
shall be designed by the department in cooperation with the
department of education.
b. The special school transportation fee for a letter-number
designated education plates plate is thirty-five dollars. The
fee for a personalized education plates plate is twenty-five
dollars, which shall be paid in addition to the special school
transportation fee of thirty-five dollars. The annual special
school transportation fee is ten dollars for a letter-number
designated registration plates plate and is fifteen dollars for
a personalized registration plates plate which shall be paid
in addition to the regular annual registration fee. The fees
collected by the director under this subsection shall be paid
monthly to the treasurer of state and deposited in the road
use tax fund. The treasurer of state shall transfer monthly
from the statutory allocations fund created under section
321.145, subsection 2, to the school budget review committee
in accordance with section 257.31, subsection 17, the amount
of the special school transportation fees collected in the
previous month for the education plates.
23. Breast cancer awareness plates.
a. Upon application and payment of the proper fees, the
director may issue a breast cancer awareness plates plate to an
owner of a motor vehicle referred to in subsection 12.
b. Breast cancer awareness plates shall contain an image
of a pink ribbon and shall be designed by the department in
consultation with the Susan G. Komen foundation.
c. The special fee for a letter-number designated breast
cancer awareness plates plate is thirty-five dollars. The fee
for a personalized breast cancer awareness plates plate is
twenty-five dollars, which shall be paid in addition to the
special breast cancer awareness fee of thirty-five dollars.
The fees collected by the director under this subsection shall
be paid monthly to the treasurer of state and deposited in
the road use tax fund. The treasurer of state shall transfer
monthly from the statutory allocations fund created under
section 321.145, subsection 2, to the Iowa department of public
health the amount of the special fees collected in the previous
month for the breast cancer awareness plates and such funds
are appropriated to the Iowa department of public health. The
Iowa department of public health shall distribute one hundred
percent of the funds received monthly in the form of grants to
support breast cancer screenings for both men and women who
meet eligibility requirements like those established by the
Susan G. Komen foundation. In the awarding of grants, the Iowa
department of public health shall give first consideration
to affiliates of the Susan G. Komen foundation and similar
nonprofit organizations providing for breast cancer screenings
at no cost in Iowa. Notwithstanding section 8.33, moneys
transferred under this subsection shall not revert to the
general fund of the state.
d. Upon receipt of the special registration plates plate,
the applicant shall surrender the current registration plates
plate to the county treasurer. The county treasurer shall
validate the special registration plates in the same manner
as regular registration plates are validated under this
section. The annual special breast cancer awareness fee for
a letter-number designated plates plate is ten dollars, which
shall be paid in addition to the regular annual registration
fee. The annual special fee for a personalized breast cancer
awareness plates plate is five dollars, which shall be paid
in addition to the annual special breast cancer awareness fee
and the regular annual registration fee. The annual special
breast cancer awareness fee shall be credited and transferred
as provided under paragraph “c”.
24. Gold star plates.
a. An owner referred to in subsection 12 who is the
surviving spouse, parent, child, or sibling of a deceased
member of the United States armed forces who died while serving
on active duty during a time of military conflict or who died
as a result of such service may order a special registration
plates plate bearing a gold star emblem upon written
application to the department accompanied by satisfactory
supporting documentation as determined by the department.
The gold star emblem shall be designed by the department in
cooperation with the commission of veterans affairs. The
special plate fees collected by the director under subsection
12, paragraph “a”, from the annual validation of letter-number
designated gold star plates, and subsection 12, paragraph “c”,
from the issuance and annual validation of personalized gold
star plates shall be paid monthly to the treasurer of state and
deposited in the road use tax fund. The treasurer of state
shall transfer monthly from the statutory allocations fund
created under section 321.145, subsection 2, to the veterans
license fee fund created in section 35A.11 the amount of the
special fees collected under subsection 12, paragraph “a”, in
the previous month for gold star plates.
b. Notwithstanding subsection 12, paragraph “a”, an owner
who is approved for a special registration plates plate under
this subsection shall be issued one set of special registration
plates plate bearing a gold star emblem at no charge.
Sec. 31. Section 321.34, subsection 25, paragraph b, Code
2018, is amended to read as follows:
b. An owner referred to in subsection 12, upon written
application to the department, may order a special registration
plates plate with a civil war sesquicentennial processed
emblem. The special plate fees collected by the director under
subsection 12, paragraphs “a” and “c”, from the issuance and
annual validation of letter-number designated and personalized
civil war sesquicentennial plates shall be paid monthly to the
treasurer of state and deposited in the road use tax fund. The
treasurer of state shall transfer monthly from the statutory
allocations fund created under section 321.145, subsection 2,
to the department of cultural affairs the amount of the special
fees collected under subsection 12, paragraph “a”, in the
previous month for civil war sesquicentennial plates, and such
funds are appropriated to the department of cultural affairs to
be used for the Iowa battle flag project.
Sec. 32. Section 321.34, subsection 26, paragraphs b and c,
Code 2018, are amended to read as follows:
b. An owner of a motor vehicle referred to in subsection
12, upon written application to the department, may order
a special registration plates plate with a fallen peace
officers processed emblem. The special fee for a letter-number
designated fallen peace officers plates plate is thirty-five
dollars. The fee for a personalized fallen peace officers
plates plate is twenty-five dollars, which shall be paid
in addition to the special fallen peace officers fee of
thirty-five dollars. The fees collected by the director under
this paragraph shall be paid monthly to the treasurer of state
and deposited in the road use tax fund. The treasurer of state
shall transfer monthly from the statutory allocations fund
created under section 321.145, subsection 2, to the department
of public safety the amount of the special fees collected
in the previous month for the fallen peace officers plates
and such funds are appropriated to the department of public
safety. The department of public safety shall distribute one
hundred percent of the funds received monthly in the form of
grants to nonprofit organizations that provide resources to
assist in the rebuilding of the lives of surviving families
and affected coworkers of law enforcement officers killed in
the line of duty. In the awarding of grants, the department
of public safety shall give first consideration to concerns of
police survivors, inc., and similar nonprofit organizations
providing such resources. Notwithstanding section 8.33, moneys
transferred under this subsection shall not revert to the
general fund of the state.
c. Upon receipt of the special registration plates plate,
the applicant shall surrender the current registration plates
plate to the county treasurer. The county treasurer shall
validate the special registration plates in the same manner
as regular registration plates are validated under this
section. The annual special fallen peace officers fee for a
letter-number designated plates plate is ten dollars, which
shall be paid in addition to the regular annual registration
fee. The annual special fee for a personalized fallen peace
officers plates plate is five dollars, which shall be paid
in addition to the annual special fallen peace officers fee
and the regular annual registration fee. The annual special
fallen peace officers fee shall be credited and transferred as
provided under paragraph “b”.
Sec. 33. Section 321.34, subsection 27, Code 2018, is
amended to read as follows:
27. United States veteran plates.
a. An owner referred to in subsection 12 who served in
the armed forces of the United States and was discharged
under honorable conditions may, upon written application
to the department and upon presentation of satisfactory
proof of military service and discharge under honorable
conditions, order a special registration plates plate bearing a
distinguishing processed emblem depicting the word “veteran”
below an image of the American flag. The application is
subject to approval by the department. The special plate fees
collected by the director under subsection 12, paragraph “a”,
from the annual validation of letter-number designated United
States veteran plates, and subsection 12, paragraph “c”, from
the issuance and annual validation of personalized United
States veteran plates, shall be paid monthly to the treasurer
of state and deposited in the road use tax fund. The treasurer
of state shall transfer monthly from the statutory allocations
fund created under section 321.145, subsection 2, to the
veterans license fee fund created in section 35A.11 the amount
of the special fees collected under subsection 12, paragraph
“a”, in the previous month for United States veteran plates.
b. Notwithstanding subsection 12, paragraph “a”, an owner
who is approved for a special registration plate under this
subsection shall be issued one set of special registration
plates plate bearing a distinguishing processed emblem
depicting the word “veteran” below an image of the American
flag at no charge.
Sec. 34. Section 321.37, Code 2018, is amended to read as
follows:
321.37 Display of plates registration plate.
1. Registration plates The registration plate issued for a
motor vehicle other than an autocycle, motorcycle, motorized
bicycle, or a truck tractor shall be attached to the rear of
the motor vehicle, one in the front and the other in the rear.
The registration plate issued for an autocycle, motorcycle,
or other vehicle required to be registered hereunder shall be
attached to the rear of the vehicle. The registration plate
issued for a truck tractor shall be attached to the front of
the truck tractor. The special plate issued to a dealer shall
be attached on the rear of the vehicle when operated on the
highways of this state.
2. Registration plates issued for a motor vehicle which
is model year 1948 or older, and reconstructed or specially
constructed vehicles built to resemble a model year 1948
vehicle or older, other than a truck registered for more than
five tons, autocycle, motorcycle, or truck tractor, may display
one registration plate on the rear of the vehicle if the other
registration plate issued to the vehicle is carried in the
vehicle at all times when the vehicle is operated on a public
highway.
3. 2. It is unlawful for the owner of a vehicle to place
any frame around or over the registration plate which does not
permit full view of all numerals and letters printed on the
registration plate.
Sec. 35. Section 321.41, subsection 3, Code 2018, is amended
to read as follows:
3. A person who has registered a vehicle in a county,
other than the county designated on the vehicle registration
plate, may apply to the county treasurer where the vehicle is
registered for a new registration plates plate upon payment
of a fee of five dollars and the return of the former county
registration plates plate.
Sec. 36. Section 321.42, subsection 1, Code 2018, is amended
to read as follows:
1. If a registration card, or plate, or pair of plates
is lost or becomes illegible, the owner shall immediately
apply for replacement. The fee for a replacement registration
card is three dollars. The fee for a replacement plate or
pair of plates other than a replacement of a special plate
issued pursuant to section 321.60 is five dollars. The
fee for replacement of a special plate issued pursuant to
section 321.60 is forty dollars. When the owner has furnished
information required by the department and paid the proper fee,
a duplicate, substitute, or new registration card, or plate,
or pair of plates may be issued. The county treasurer or the
department may waive the fee for a replacement plate if the
plate is lost during a documented accident.
Sec. 37. Section 321.46, subsection 7, Code 2018, is amended
to read as follows:
7. If a motor vehicle is leased and the lessee purchases
the vehicle upon termination of the lease, the lessor shall,
upon claim by the lessee with the lessor within six months of
the purchase, assign the annual registration fee credit and
registration plates plate for the leased motor vehicle to the
lessee. Credit shall be applied as provided in subsection 3.
Sec. 38. Section 321.47, subsection 3, Code 2018, is amended
to read as follows:
3. Whenever ownership of a vehicle is transferred under the
provisions of this section, the registration plates plate shall
be removed and forwarded to the county treasurer of the county
where the vehicle is registered or to the department if the
vehicle is owned by a nonresident. Upon transfer the vehicle
shall not be operated upon the highways of this state until the
person entitled to possession of the vehicle applies for and
obtains registration for the vehicle.
Sec. 39. Section 321.52, subsection 1, Code 2018, is amended
to read as follows:
1. When a vehicle is sold outside the state for purposes
other than for junk, the owner, dealer, or otherwise, shall
detach the registration plates plate and registration card and
shall indicate on the registration card the name and address
of the foreign purchaser or transferee over the person’s
signature. Unless the registration plates are plate is
legally attached to another vehicle, the owner shall surrender
the registration plates plate and registration card to the
county treasurer, who shall cancel the records, destroy the
registration plates plate, and forward the registration card
to the department. The department shall make a notation on
the records of the out-of-state sale and, after a reasonable
period, may destroy the files for that particular vehicle.
The department is not authorized to make a refund of annual
registration fees on a vehicle sold out of state unless it
receives the registration card completed as provided in this
section.
Sec. 40. Section 321.52, subsection 3, paragraphs a and b,
Code 2018, are amended to read as follows:
a. When a vehicle for which a certificate of title is issued
is junked or dismantled by the owner, the owner shall detach
the registration plates plate and surrender the plates plate to
the county treasurer, unless the plates are plate is properly
assigned to another vehicle. The owner shall also surrender
the certificate of title to the county treasurer, except when
the vehicle is disposed of pursuant to subsection 2, paragraph
“b”.
b. Upon the surrender of the certificate of title and
application for junking certificate, the county treasurer shall
issue to the person, without fee, a junking certificate, which
shall authorize the holder to possess, transport, or transfer
ownership of the junked vehicle by endorsement of the junking
certificate. The county treasurer shall hold the surrendered
certificate of title, registration receipt, application for
junking certificate, and, if applicable, the registration
plates plate for a period of fourteen days following the
issuance of a junking certificate under this subsection.
Sec. 41. Section 321.57, subsection 3, Code 2018, is amended
to read as follows:
3. Also, a transporter may operate or move any vehicle of
like type upon the highways solely for the purpose of delivery
upon likewise displaying thereon on the vehicle a like plates
plate issued to the transporter as provided in these sections.
Sec. 42. Section 321.89, subsection 1, paragraph a,
subparagraph (1), Code 2018, is amended to read as follows:
(1) A vehicle that has been left unattended on public
property for more than twenty-four hours and lacks a current
registration plates plate or two or more wheels or other parts
which renders the vehicle totally inoperable.
Sec. 43. Section 321.96, subsection 1, Code 2018, is amended
to read as follows:
1. A person shall not display or cause or permit to be
displayed, or have in the person’s possession, a vehicle
identification number or component part number except as
provided in this chapter, or a canceled, revoked, altered,
or fictitious registration number plates plate, registration
receipt, or certificate of title, as the same are respectively
provided for in this chapter.
Sec. 44. Section 321.98, subsection 1, paragraph a, Code
2018, is amended to read as follows:
a. A valid registration card and registration plate or
plates issued for the vehicle for the current registration
year are attached to and displayed on the vehicle when and as
required by this chapter; and
Sec. 45. Section 321.101A, Code 2018, is amended to read as
follows:
321.101A Revocation of registration by county treasurer.
The county treasurer may revoke the registration and
registration plates plate of a vehicle if the annual
registration fee or the fee for new registration is paid by
check, electronic payment, or credit card and the check,
electronic payment, or credit card is not honored by the
payer’s financial institution or credit card company, upon
reasonable notice and demand. The owner of the vehicle or
person in possession of the registration and registration
plates plate for the vehicle shall immediately return the
revoked registration and registration plates plate to the
appropriate county treasurer’s office.
Sec. 46. Section 321.103, Code 2018, is amended to read as
follows:
321.103 Owner to return evidences of registration and title.
Whenever If the department as authorized hereunder under
this chapter cancels, suspends, or revokes the registration
of a vehicle, or certificate of title, or registration
card, or registration plate or plates, or any nonresident or
other permit or the registration of any dealer, the owner or
person in possession of the same shall immediately return the
evidences of registration, certificate of title, or plates
plate so canceled, suspended, or revoked to the department.
Sec. 47. Section 321.104, subsection 3, Code 2018, is
amended to read as follows:
3. To fail to surrender a certificate of title, registration
card, or registration plates plate upon cancellation,
suspension, or revocation of the certificate or registration by
the department and notice as prescribed in this chapter.
Sec. 48. Section 321.105, subsections 2 and 5, Code 2018,
are amended to read as follows:
2. The annual registration fee shall be paid to the county
treasurer at the same time the application is made for the
registration or reregistration of the motor vehicle or trailer.
An owner may, when applying for registration or reregistration
of a motor vehicle or trailer, request that the plates plate be
mailed to the owner’s post office address. The owner’s request
shall be accompanied by a mailing fee as determined annually by
the director in consultation with the Iowa county treasurers
association.
5. Seriously disabled veterans who have been provided with
an automobile or other vehicle by the United States government
under the provisions of §1901 – 1903, Tit. 38 of the United
States Code, 38 U.S.C. §1901 et seq. (1970) §3901 – 3904, shall
be exempt from payment of the registration fee fees provided in
this chapter for that vehicle, and shall be provided, without
fee, with one set of regular registration plates plate or one
set of any type of special registration plates plate associated
with service in the United States armed forces for which the
disabled veteran qualifies under section 321.34. The disabled
veteran, to be able to claim the benefit, must be a resident of
the state of Iowa. In lieu of the set of regular or special
military registration plates plate available without fee,
the disabled veteran may obtain a set of nonmilitary special
registration plates plate or personalized plates plate issued
under section 321.34 by paying the additional fees associated
with those plates that plate.
Sec. 49. Section 321.115, subsection 1, paragraph c, Code
2018, is amended to read as follows:
c. The owner of a motor vehicle registered under this
subsection may display an authentic Iowa registration plate
or set of plates from the model year of the motor vehicle,
furnished by the person and approved by the department, in
lieu of the current and valid Iowa registration plates plate
issued for the vehicle, provided that the current and valid
Iowa registration plates plate and the registration card issued
for the vehicle are simultaneously carried within the vehicle
and are available for inspection to any peace officer upon the
officer’s request.
Sec. 50. Section 321.115A, subsection 1, Code 2018, is
amended to read as follows:
1. A motor vehicle may be registered as a replica vehicle or
street rod. The annual registration fee is the fee provided
for in section 321.109, 321.113, 321.122, or 321.124. The
owner of a vehicle registered under this section may display
a registration plate or set of plates from or representing
the model year of the motor vehicle or the model year of the
motor vehicle the registered vehicle is designed to resemble,
furnished by the person and approved by the department, in
lieu of the current and valid Iowa registration plates plate
issued for the vehicle, provided that the current and valid
Iowa registration plates plate and the registration card issued
for the vehicle are simultaneously carried within the vehicle
and are available for inspection to any peace officer upon the
officer’s request.
Sec. 51. Section 321.120, subsection 3, Code 2018, is
amended to read as follows:
3. Upon approval of the application and payment of the
proper fees, the county treasurer shall issue a regular
registration plates plate for the business-trade truck. The
department may adopt rules requiring the use of a sticker or
other means to identify motor vehicles registered under this
section.
Sec. 52. Section 321.121, subsection 2, Code 2018, is
amended to read as follows:
2. Upon approval of the application and payment of the
proper fees, the county treasurer shall issue a regular
registration plates plate for the special truck. The
department may adopt rules requiring the use of a sticker or
other means to identify motor vehicles registered under this
section.
Sec. 53. Section 321.126, subsection 1, paragraphs a, c, d,
and h, Code 2018, are amended to read as follows:
a. If the vehicle is destroyed by fire or accident, or
junked and its identity as a vehicle entirely eliminated, the
owner in whose name the vehicle was registered at the time of
destruction or dismantling shall return the plates registration
plate to the department and within thirty days thereafter make
a statement of such destruction or dismantling and make claim
for refund. With reference to the destruction or dismantling
of a vehicle, no refund shall be allowed unless a junking
certificate has been issued, as provided in section 321.52.
c. If the vehicle is placed in storage by the owner upon
the owner’s entry into the military service of the United
States, the owner shall return the plates registration plate
to the county treasurer or the department and make a statement
regarding the storage and military service and make claim for
refund. Whenever the owner of a vehicle so placed in storage
desires to again register the vehicle, the county treasurer or
department shall compute and collect the fees for registration
for the registration year commencing in the month the vehicle
is removed from storage.
d. If the vehicle is registered by the county treasurer
during the current registration year and the owner or lessee
registers the vehicle for apportioned registration under
chapter 326, the owner of the registered vehicle shall
surrender the registration plates plate to the county treasurer
and may file a claim for refund. In lieu of a refund, a credit
for the annual registration fees paid to the county treasurer
may be applied by the department to the owner or lessee’s
apportioned registration fees upon the surrender of the county
plates plate and registration.
h. If the owner of the vehicle moves out of state, the
owner may make a claim for a refund by returning the Iowa
registration plates plate, along with evidence of the vehicle’s
registration in another jurisdiction, to the county treasurer
of the county in which the vehicle was registered within
six months of the out-of-state registration. For purposes
of section 321.127, the unexpired months remaining in the
registration year shall be calculated on the basis of the
effective date of the out-of-state registration. However, for
the purpose of timely issuance of the refund, the claim for a
refund under this paragraph is considered to be filed on the
date the registration documents are received by the county
treasurer.
Sec. 54. Section 321.134, subsection 1, Code 2018, is
amended to read as follows:
1. On the first day of the second month following the
beginning of each registration year a penalty of five percent
of the annual registration fee shall be added to the annual
registration fees not paid by that date and an additional
penalty of five percent shall be added the first day of each
succeeding month, until the fee is paid. A penalty shall
not be less than five dollars. If the owner of a vehicle
surrenders the registration plates plate for a vehicle prior to
the plates plate becoming delinquent, to the county treasurer
of the county where the vehicle is registered, or to the
department if the vehicle is registered under chapter 326,
the owner may register the vehicle any time thereafter upon
payment of the annual registration fee for the registration
year without penalty. To avoid a penalty or an additional
penalty in the case of a delinquent registration through a
county treasurer, if the last calendar day of a month falls
on Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday, the payment deadline is
extended to include the first business day of the following
month. For payments made through a county treasurer’s
authorized internet site only, if the last day of the month
falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday, the electronic
payment must be entered by midnight on the first business day
of the next month. All other electronic payments must be
entered by midnight on the last day of the month preceding the
delinquent date.
Sec. 55. Section 321.166, subsection 1, paragraph b, Code
2018, is amended to read as follows:
b. Trailers A trailer with an empty weights weight of two
thousand pounds or less may, upon request, be licensed with a
regular-sized license plates plate.
Sec. 56. Section 321.166, subsections 2, 6, 8, and 10, Code
2018, are amended to read as follows:
2. Every registration plate or pair of plates shall
display a registration plate number which shall consist
of alphabetical or numerical characters or a combination
thereof of characters and the name of this state, which may be
abbreviated. Every registration plate issued by the county
treasurer shall display the name of the county, including any
plate issued pursuant to section 321.34, except Pearl Harbor
and purple heart registration plates issued prior to January 1,
1997; registration plates issued pursuant to section 321.34,
subsection 13, paragraph “d”; and collegiate, fire fighter, and
medal of honor registration plates. Special truck registration
plates shall display the word “special”. The department may
adopt rules to implement this subsection.
6. Registration plates A registration plate issued to a
disabled veteran under the provisions of section 321.105 shall
display the alphabetical characters “DV” which shall precede
the registration plate number. The plates plate may also
display a persons with disabilities parking sticker if issued
to the disabled veteran by the department under section 321L.2.
8. The owner of a trailer with an empty weight of two
thousand pounds or less shall receive a registration plates
plate for the trailer smaller than plates a plate regularly
issued for automobiles a motor vehicle pursuant to rules
adopted by the department in accordance with this section
unless the owner requests a regular-sized plates plate.
10. If the department reissues a new registration plate
design for a special registration plate under section 321.34,
all persons who have purchased or obtained the special
registration plates plate shall not be required to pay the
issuance fee.
Sec. 57. Section 321.385A, subsection 1, paragraph b, Code
2018, is amended to read as follows:
b. A citation issued for failure to have rear lamps as
required under section 321.387 or a rear registration plate
light as required under section 321.388 shall first provide for
a seventy-two hour period within which the person charged with
the violation shall replace or repair the lamps or light.
Sec. 58. Section 321.385A, subsection 2, Code 2018, is
amended to read as follows:
2. If the person complies with the directive to replace or
repair the headlamp, rear lamps, or rear registration plate
light within the allotted time period, the citation shall be
expunged. If the person fails to comply within the allotted
time period, the citation shall be processed in the same manner
as other citations.
Sec. 59. Section 321.388, Code 2018, is amended to read as
follows:
321.388 Illuminating plates.
Either the rear lamp or a separate lamp shall be so
constructed and placed as to illuminate with a white light the
rear registration plate attached to the rear of the vehicle and
render it clearly legible from a distance of fifty feet to the
rear. When the rear registration plate is illuminated by an
electric lamp other than the required rear lamp, the two lamps
shall be turned on or off only by the same control switch at
all times when headlamps are lighted. This section does not
apply to commercial vehicles engaged exclusively in intrastate
commerce that are dump trucks or that are used exclusively for
the movement of construction materials and equipment to and
from construction projects.
Sec. 60. Section 321J.4B, subsection 5, paragraph f,
subparagraph (1), Code 2018, is amended to read as follows:
(1) If the vehicle subject to the court order is not in
the custody of a law enforcement agency, the person or agency
designated in the order as the person or agency responsible for
executing the order shall, upon receipt of the order, promptly
locate the vehicle specified in the order, seize the motor
vehicle and the license plates registration plate, and send or
deliver the vehicle’s license plates registration plate to the
department.
Sec. 61. Section 321J.4B, subsection 7, Code 2018, is
amended to read as follows:
7. a. Upon receipt of a notice of conviction of the
defendant for a violation of subsection 2, the impounding
authority shall seize the motor vehicle’s license plates
registration plate and registration, and shall send or deliver
them to the department.
b. The department shall destroy license plates a
registration plate received under this section and shall not
authorize the release of the vehicle or the issuance of a new
license plates registration plate for the vehicle until the
period of impoundment or immobilization has expired, and the
fee and costs assessed under subsection 10 have been paid. The
fee for issuance of a new license plates registration plate and
certificates certificate of registration shall be the same as
for the replacement of a lost, mutilated, or destroyed license
plates registration plate and certificates certificate of
registration.
Sec. 62. Section 321L.2, subsection 1, paragraph a,
subparagraphs (1) and (2), Code 2018, are amended to read as
follows:
(1) Persons with disabilities registration plates. An
applicant may order a persons with disabilities registration
plates plate pursuant to section 321.34. An applicant may
order a persons with disabilities registration plate for a
trailer used to transport a wheelchair pursuant to section
321.34 in addition to a persons with disabilities registration
plates plate ordered by the applicant for a motor vehicle used
to tow such a trailer pursuant to section 321.34.
(2) Persons with disabilities parking sticker. An
applicant who owns a motor vehicle for which the applicant has
been issued a registration plates plate under section 321.34
or a registration plates plate as a seriously disabled veteran
under section 321.105 may apply to the department for a persons
with disabilities parking sticker to be affixed to the plates
plate. The persons with disabilities parking stickers shall
bear the international symbol of accessibility.
Sec. 63. Section 321L.2, subsection 5, Code 2018, is amended
to read as follows:
5. A seriously disabled veteran who has been provided with
an automobile or other vehicle by the United States government
under the provisions of 38 U.S.C. §1901 et seq. (1970) §3901 –
3904 is not required to apply for a persons with disabilities
parking permit under this section unless the veteran has been
issued a special registration plates plate or personalized
plates plate for the vehicle. The regular registration plates
plate issued for the disabled veteran’s vehicle without fee
pursuant to section 321.105 entitle entitles the disabled
veteran to all of the rights and privileges associated with
persons with disabilities parking permits under this chapter.
Sec. 64. Section 321L.2A, subsection 1, paragraph e, Code
2018, is amended to read as follows:
e. The person carries in the motor vehicle a copy
of the statement from a physician, physician assistant,
advanced registered nurse practitioner, or chiropractor
which accompanied the person’s application for a persons with
disabilities registration plates plate under section 321.34 or
other persons with disabilities parking permit under section
321L.2 and which indicates the person is permanently unable to
walk. The person shall show the copy of the statement to any
peace officer upon request.
Sec. 65. Section 326.3, subsection 3, paragraph b, Code
2018, is amended to read as follows:
b. A recreational vehicle, a vehicle displaying a restricted
plates plate, a bus used in the transportation of chartered
parties, or a government-owned vehicle is not an apportionable
vehicle; except that a truck or truck tractor, or the power
unit in a combination of vehicles having a gross vehicle weight
of twenty-six thousand pounds or less, or a bus used in the
transportation of chartered parties may be registered under the
plan at the option of the registrant.
Sec. 66. Section 326.12, unnumbered paragraph 1, Code 2018,
is amended to read as follows:
Registrants who delete commercial vehicles displaying an
Iowa base plates plate from the fleet after the commencement of
the registration year shall be allowed to transfer registration
credit to a replacement vehicle in accordance with this
section. Iowa shall allow credit for non-Iowa based deleted
vehicles only if the jurisdiction designated by the registrant
as the base jurisdiction of the deleted vehicle permits
transfer of registration credit to the replacement vehicle.
Allowance of credit for deleted vehicles shall be subject to
the following conditions:
Sec. 67. Section 721.8, Code 2018, is amended to read as
follows:
721.8 Labeling publicly owned motor vehicles.
All publicly owned motor vehicles shall bear at least
two labels in a conspicuous place, one on each side of the
vehicle. This label shall be designed to cover not less than
one square foot of surface. This section does not apply to
a motor vehicle which is specifically assigned by the head
of the department or office owning or controlling it, to
enforcement of police regulations or to motor vehicles issued
an ordinary registration plates plate pursuant to section
321.19, subsection 1.
Sec. 68. CODE EDITOR DIRECTIVE. The Code editor may make
any change the Code editor deems necessary to any Code section
that refers, in any context, to a set of, a pair of, or two
motor vehicle registration plates rather than one registration
plate, when there appears to be no doubt as to the proper
method of making the correction.
Sec. 69. TRANSITION PROVISIONS. The transition from the
use of registration plates on both the front and rear of
certain motor vehicles to the use of such plates on only the
front or rear of certain motor vehicles, as directed by this
Act, shall be accomplished in stages. A person applying for
a new or replacement registration plate on or after July 1,
2018, shall receive only one registration plate. Otherwise,
the transition shall not be accomplished until a new series of
registration plates is issued to replace a current series. The
department of transportation shall adopt rules to implement the
transition.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
Under current law, two registration plates are issued
for any motor vehicle other than an autocycle, motorcycle,
motorized bicycle, or truck tractor, and are required to be
attached to the front and rear of the vehicle, with certain
exceptions.
This bill provides that only one registration plate shall
be issued for a motor vehicle. The registration plate shall
be attached to the rear of the motor vehicle, except that the
registration plate for a truck tractor shall be attached to the
front of the truck tractor, consistent with current law.
The bill also makes corresponding Code language changes,
makes some Code language changes to enhance readability,
updates certain references to the United States Code, directs
the Code editor to make changes to language referring to two
registration plates rather than one, and provides for the
transition from the use of two registration plates to the use
of one registration plate.