An Act concerning county supervisor districting plans.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. Section 68B.32A, subsection 16, Code 2018, is
amended to read as follows:
16. Establish an expedited procedure for reviewing
complaints forwarded by the state commissioner of elections
to the board for a determination as to whether a supervisor
district plan adopted pursuant to section 331.210A that differs
from a supervisor district plan prepared by the legislative
services agency was drawn for improper political reasons
as described in section 42.4, subsection 5. The expedited
procedure shall be substantially similar to the process used
for other complaints filed with the board except that the
provisions of section 68B.32D shall not apply.
Sec. 2. Section 331.209, subsection 4, Code 2018, is amended
to read as follows:
4. Each temporary county redistricting commission shall
notify the state commissioner of elections when the boundaries
of supervisor districts are changed, shall provide a map
delineating the new boundary lines, and shall certify to
the state commissioner of elections the populations of the
new supervisor districts as determined under the latest
federal decennial census. Upon failure of a temporary county
redistricting commission to make the required changes by
the dates specified by this section and sections 331.203
and 331.204 as determined by the state commissioner of
elections, the state commissioner of elections shall make or
cause to be made the necessary changes as soon as possible,
and shall assess to the county the expenses incurred in so
doing. The Except for a representation plan drawn pursuant
to section 331.210A, subsection 2, paragraph “f”, the state
commissioner of elections may request the services of personnel
and materials available to the legislative services agency
to assist the state commissioner in making required changes
in supervisor district boundaries which become the state
commissioner’s responsibility.
Sec. 3. Section 331.210A, subsection 2, paragraph f,
subparagraph (1), Code 2018, is amended to read as follows:
(1) (a) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section
to the contrary, for For purposes of this paragraph “f”,
“qualifying county” means a county with a population of one
hundred fifty thousand or more based on the most recent federal
decennial census that elects supervisors under plan “three”
as defined in section 331.206, or a county with a population
of one hundred eighty thousand or more that has adopted a
charter for a city-county consolidated form of government or
a community commonwealth form of government and which charter
provides for representation by districts,.
(b) Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the
contrary, for a qualifying county, the legislative services
agency, and not the temporary county redistricting commission,
shall draw a representation plan as provided by paragraph “a”
pursuant to a contract executed with the county.
(c) A county subject to the requirements of this paragraph
“f” shall notify the state commissioner of elections that a
representation plan to be drawn pursuant to this paragraph
“f” is required and shall submit to the state commissioner
of elections the precinct plan to be used to draw the
representation plan. Upon notification and submission of a
precinct plan, the state commissioner of elections shall review
and approve the precinct plan to be used. Following approval
of the precinct plan to be used, the state commissioner
of elections shall notify the legislative council which
shall direct the legislative services agency to prepare a
representation plan for the county.
(d) The plan drawn by the legislative services agency
shall be based upon the precinct plan adopted and approved
for use by the county and shall be drawn in accordance with
section 42.4, to the extent applicable. After the legislative
services agency has drawn the plan, the legislative services
agency shall at the earliest feasible time make available to
the public all of the information required to be made public
by paragraph “b”.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
This bill concerns county supervisor districting plans for
certain counties.
Code section 331.210A(2)(f) is amended to provide that the
procedure for adopting a representation plan for a county that
has a population that exceeds 180,000 or that has adopted a
charter for a city-county consolidation form or community
commonwealth form that provides for representation by districts
shall also apply to a county with a population of 150,000 or
more that has adopted a plan “three” form of representation.
The procedure provides that the county’s initial plan for
districts, and the county’s first plan for districts after each
federal decennial census, shall be drawn by the legislative
services agency based upon an approved precinct plan for
the county and the standards applicable to congressional
and legislative redistricting. If the plan drawn by the
legislative services agency is rejected by the governing body,
the governing body shall direct the legislative services agency
to prepare another plan as provided by current law.
Code section 68B.32A, concerning complaints for improper
political reasons relative to an adopted supervisor district
plan, is amended to make the complaint process inapplicable
to plans prepared by the legislative services agency. In
addition, Code section 331.209 is amended to provide that
the state commissioner of elections shall not be permitted
to request assistance from the legislative services agency
relating to a representation plan drawn pursuant to Code
section 331.210A(2)(f).