An Act modifying the periods of time to bring certain civil
actions, including by victims of sexual abuse, minors, and
persons with mental illness, and including effective date
provisions.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. Section 614.1, subsection 12, Code 2018, is
amended to read as follows:
12. Sexual abuse or sexual exploitation by a counselor,
therapist, or school employee. An action for damages for
injury suffered as a result of sexual abuse, as defined in
section 709.1, by a counselor, therapist, or school employee,
as defined in section 709.15, or as a result of sexual
exploitation by a counselor, therapist, or school employee
shall be brought within five ten years of the date the victim
was last treated by the counselor or therapist, or within
five ten years of the date the victim was last enrolled in or
attended the school.
Sec. 2. Section 614.8, Code 2018, is amended to read as
follows:
614.8 Minors and persons with mental illness.
1. The times limited for actions in this chapter, or for
complaints or claims in chapter 216, 669, or 670, except those
brought for penalties and forfeitures, are extended in favor
of persons with mental illness, so that they shall have one
year from and after the termination of the disability within
which to file a complaint pursuant to chapter 216, to make a
claim pursuant to chapter 669 or 670, or to otherwise commence
an action.
2. Except as provided in section 614.1, subsection 9, or
section 614.8A, the times limited for actions in this chapter,
or for complaints or claims in chapter 216, 669, or 670, except
those brought for penalties and forfeitures, are extended in
favor of minors, so that they shall have one year from and
after attainment of majority within which to file a complaint
pursuant to chapter 216, to make a claim pursuant to chapter
669, or to otherwise commence an action.
Sec. 3. Section 614.8A, Code 2018, is amended to read as
follows:
614.8A Damages Commencement of action for minor or child
sexual abuse —— time limitation.
1. Notwithstanding section 614.8, subsection 2, and the
times limited for actions in this chapter, the time to file an
action relating to sexual abuse which occurred when the injured
person was a minor is extended twenty-five years beyond the
minor’s attainment of eighteen years of age.
2. An In addition to the extension of time provided in
subsection 1, an action for damages for injury suffered as
a result of sexual abuse which occurred when the injured
person was a child, but not discovered until after the injured
person is of the age of majority, shall be brought within four
twenty-five years from the time of discovery by the injured
party of both the injury and the causal relationship between
the injury and the sexual abuse.
Sec. 4. EFFECTIVE UPON ENACTMENT. This Act, being deemed of
immediate importance, takes effect upon enactment.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
This bill modifies the periods of time to bring civil actions
relating to young persons and persons with mental illness.
Under current Code section 614.1(12), a civil action for
damages for injury suffered as result of sexual abuse, as
defined in Code section 709.1, or sexual exploitation, by a
counselor, therapist, or school employee, each as defined in
Code section 709.15, can only be brought within five years
after the date that the victim was either last treated by the
counselor or therapist or last enrolled in or attended the
school. The bill amends the current law to provide that a
victim may bring such an action within 10 years of the date
that the victim was either last treated by the counselor or
therapist or last enrolled in or attended the school.
Under current Code section 614.8, the applicable limitations
period in which to bring certain civil actions is extended for
persons with mental illness and minors. Under current Code
section 670.2, a municipality is subject to liability for the
municipality’s torts and those of the municipality’s officers
and employees, acting within the scope of such officers’
and employees’ employment or duties. Under current Code
section 670.5, an action for damages for an injury against a
municipality cannot be brought after two years of the alleged
injury, except as provided in Code section 614.8.
The bill amends Code section 614.8 to specify that the
extension of the limitations period for persons with mental
illness and for minors applies to claims brought pursuant to
Code chapter 670, which chapter is already referenced at the
beginning of the sentences extending the limitations period.
The amendment to Code section 614.8A in the bill extends
the time for filing a civil action relating to sexual abuse
which occurred when the injured person was a minor from one
year after the attainment of majority to 25 years after the
attainment of majority.
The amendment to Code section 614.8A in the bill also
provides that a civil action for damages relating to sexual
abuse which occurred when the injured party was a child shall
be brought within 25 years from the time of the discovery of
both the injury and the causal relationship between the injury
and the sexual abuse. Current law specifies such an action
shall be brought within four years from the time of discovery
of both the injury and the causal relationship between the
injury and the sexual abuse.
The bill takes effect upon enactment.