An Act relating to peace officer personal information under
the control of local officials and including effective date
provisions.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. NEW SECTION. 331.911 Request to limit public
access to certain peace officer personal information —— internet
sites.
1. Notwithstanding chapter 22, a peace officer, as defined
in section 801.4, may file a written request with a local
official on a form prescribed by the department of public
safety, in consultation with the Iowa county recorders
association and the Iowa state association of assessors, to
prohibit the general public from accessing, on an internet site
maintained by the local official, the peace officer’s name,
residential address, and telephone number, as identified by
the peace officer, that are contained in instruments, books,
records, indexes, and other information under the authority of
the local official.
2. Within fifteen days of receiving the request, the local
official shall ensure that the peace officer’s information
identified by the peace officer under subsection 1 does not
appear in search results on an internet site maintained by the
local official.
3. For purposes of this section, “local official” means a
county auditor, county treasurer, county recorder, or local
assessor.
Sec. 2. IMPLEMENTATION OF ACT. Section 25B.2, subsection
3, shall not apply to this Act.
Sec. 3. EFFECTIVE UPON ENACTMENT. This Act, being deemed of
immediate importance, takes effect upon enactment.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
This bill provides that a peace officer may file a written
request with a local official on a form prescribed by the
department of public safety, in consultation with the Iowa
county recorders association and the Iowa state association of
assessors, to prohibit the general public from accessing, on
an internet site maintained by the local official, the peace
officer’s name, residential address, and telephone number,
as identified by the peace officer, that are contained in
instruments, books, records, indexes, and other information
under the authority of the local official. Within 15 days of
receiving the request, the local official shall ensure that the
peace officer’s information does not appear in search results
on an internet site maintained by the local official. The
bill defines “local official” to mean a county auditor, county
treasurer, county recorder, or local assessor.
The bill may include a state mandate as defined in Code
section 25B.3. The bill makes inapplicable Code section 25B.2,
subsection 3, which would relieve a political subdivision from
complying with a state mandate if funding for the cost of
the state mandate is not provided or specified. Therefore,
political subdivisions are required to comply with any state
mandate included in the bill.
The bill takes effect upon enactment.