An Act relating to the membership of the state judicial
nominating commission and district judicial nominating
commissions and providing an effective date.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. Section 46.1, Code 2017, is amended to read as
follows:
46.1 Appointment of state judicial nominating commissioners.
The Except as otherwise provided in section 46.1A, the
governor shall appoint, subject to confirmation by the senate,
one four eligible elector electors of each congressional
district to the state judicial nominating commission for a
six-year term beginning and ending as provided in section
69.19. The terms of no more than three six nor less than two
four of the members shall expire within the same two-year
period. No more than a simple majority of the members
appointed shall be of the same gender. The appointed members
shall be voting members.
Sec. 2. NEW SECTION. 46.1A State judicial nominating
members —— appointment —— transition.
1. In order to transition to sixteen appointed members for
the state judicial nominating commission and to ensure each
appointed member serves a six-year term, and future terms are
staggered, the composition of the state judicial nominating
commission shall consist of the following number of appointed
members during the following time periods:
a. At the time of appointing successors for the two
appointive terms ending on April 30, 2018, the governor shall
appoint a total of five eligible electors to the state judicial
nominating commission. The appointive membership of the state
judicial nominating commission shall then consist of eleven
appointed members from May 1, 2018, through April 30, 2020.
b. At the time of appointing successors for the three
appointive terms ending on April 30, 2020, the governor shall
appoint a total of six eligible electors to the state judicial
nominating commission. The appointive membership of the state
judicial nominating commission shall then consist of fourteen
appointed members from May 1, 2020, through April 30, 2022.
c. At the time of appointing successors for the three
appointive terms ending on April 30, 2022, the governor shall
appoint a total of four eligible electors to the state judicial
nominating commission. The appointive membership of the state
judicial nominating commission shall then consist of sixteen
appointed members from May 1, 2022, and every year thereafter.
2. To ensure geographic balance during the transition
to sixteen appointed members the governor shall first make
an appointment to the state judicial nominating commission
from the eligible electors of a congressional district with
the least number of appointed members on the commission. If
two or more congressional districts with the least number of
appointed members have equal membership the governor shall make
an appointment to break the tie and then appoint a member from
the congressional district with the least number of appointed
members on the commission.
Sec. 3. Section 46.2, Code 2017, is amended by striking the
section and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
46.2 Election of state judicial nominating commission member.
1. The resident members of the bar shall elect one
eligible elector of the state to the state judicial nominating
commission for a six-year term beginning July 1, 2021. The
members of the bar shall in January, immediately preceding the
expiration of the term, elect a successor for a like term. The
elected member shall be a nonvoting, advisory member.
2. The elected members of the state judicial nominating
commission serving on the commission as of the effective
date of this Act shall remain on the commission as nonvoting
members until their respective terms end, and no new successor
member shall be elected except as provided in subsection 3.
The voting terms of the elected members of the state judicial
nominating commission end on the effective date of this Act.
3. In January 2023, the members of the bar shall elect the
eligible elector as provided in subsection 1.
Sec. 4. Section 46.2A, Code 2017, is amended by striking the
section and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
46.2A Chairperson of the state judicial nominating
commission.
1. The justice of the supreme court who is senior in length,
other than the chief justice, shall be the chairperson of the
state judicial nominating commission. The chairperson shall
be a nonvoting advisory member of the commission unless a vote
ends in a tie, in such case the chairperson is eligible to cast
the tie-breaking vote.
2. If supreme court justices have equal length of service,
the eldest of such justices shall be the chairperson of the
state judicial nominating commission.
Sec. 5. Section 46.3, subsection 1, Code 2017, is amended
to read as follows:
1. The governor shall appoint five eligible electors of each
judicial election district to the district judicial nominating
commission. The appointed commissioners shall be voting
members.
Sec. 6. Section 46.4, Code 2017, is amended by striking the
section and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
46.4 Election of district judicial nominating commissioner.
1. The resident members of the bar of each judicial election
district shall elect one eligible elector of the district to
the district judicial nominating commission for a six-year
term beginning February 1, 2022. The members of the bar shall
in January, immediately preceding the expiration of the term,
elect a successor for a like term. The elected commissioner
shall be a nonvoting, advisory commissioner.
2. The elected commissioners of the district judicial
nominating commission serving on the commission as of the
effective date of this Act shall remain on the commission as
nonvoting members until their respective terms end, and no new
successor commissioner shall be elected except as provided in
subsection 3. The voting terms of the elected commissioners
of the district judicial nominating commission end on the
effective date of this Act.
3. In January 2022, the members of the bar shall elect the
eligible elector as provided in subsection 1.
Sec. 7. NEW SECTION. 46.4A Chairperson of district judicial
nominating commission.
1. The district judge who is senior in length shall be the
chairperson of the district judicial nominating commission.
The chairperson shall be a nonvoting, advisory member of the
commission unless a vote ends in a tie, in such case the
chairperson is eligible to cast the tie-breaking vote.
2. If district judges have equal length of service, the
eldest of such judges shall be the chairperson of the district
judicial nominating commission.
Sec. 8. REPEAL. Section 46.6, Code 2017, is repealed.
Sec. 9. EFFECTIVE UPON ENACTMENT. This Act, being deemed of
immediate importance, takes effect upon enactment.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
This bill relates to the membership of the state judicial
nominating commission and the district judicial nominating
commissions.
The state judicial nominating commission nominates persons
for appointment by the governor to the supreme court and the
court of appeals. The judicial district nominating commissions
nominate persons for appointment by the governor to the
district court bench as district judges.
STATE JUDICIAL NOMINATING COMMISSION. The bill specifies
that members appointed to the state judicial nominating
commission by the governor shall be voting members of the
commission and members elected to the commission by members
of the state bar shall be advisory nonvoting members of the
commission. Current law provides that both appointed and
elected members of the state judicial nominating commission are
voting members.
The bill establishes a process for transitioning the voting
membership of the state judicial nominating commission from
eight members appointed by the governor and eight members
elected by the state bar to 16 members only appointed by the
governor.
In order for the state judicial nominating commission to
transition from eight appointed members to 16 appointed members
and to ensure each appointed member serves a six-year term,
and future terms are staggered, the size of the state judicial
nominating commission shall vary during the transitional period
under the bill. Beginning with the two appointive terms
ending on April 30, 2018, the governor shall appoint five
eligible electors to the state judicial nominating commission.
The appointive membership of the state judicial nominating
commission shall then consist of 11 appointed members from May
1, 2018, through April 30, 2020. Beginning with the three
appointive terms ending on April 30, 2020, the governor shall
appoint six eligible electors to the state judicial nominating
commission. The appointive membership of the state judicial
nominating commission shall then consist of 14 appointed
members from May 1, 2020, through April 30, 2022. Beginning
with the two appointive terms ending on April 30, 2022, the
governor shall appoint four eligible electors to the state
judicial nominating commission. The appointive membership
of the state judicial nominating commission, having achieved
the required number of appointed members, shall consist of 16
appointed members after May 1, 2022, and every year thereafter.
The bill reduces the number of members of the state judicial
nominating commission elected by the resident members of
the bar from seven members to one member by July 1, 2021,
and makes all current elected members nonvoting members of
the commission. The current members of the state judicial
nominating commission shall remain on the commission until the
respective term of the member ends. The last terms of current
elected members end on June 30, 2021. When the last terms
of current elected members end, the bill provides that the
resident members of the bar shall elect one eligible elector
of the state to the state judicial nominating commission for a
six-year, nonvoting term beginning July 1, 2021, and every six
years thereafter.
DISTRICT JUDICIAL NOMINATING COMMISSIONS. The bill
specifies that members appointed to the district judicial
nominating commissions by the governor shall be voting members
of the commissions and members elected to the commission by
members of the state bar shall be advisory, nonvoting members
of the commissions. Current law provides that both appointed
and elected members of the district judicial nominating
commissions are voting members.
Under the bill, the number of commissioners appointed by the
governor to serve on a district judicial nominating commission
remains at five commissioners.
The bill reduces the number of commissioners of a district
judicial nominating commission elected by the resident members
of the bar from five members to one member by February 1, 2022,
and makes all current elected members nonvoting members of
the commission. The current members of the district judicial
nominating commission shall remain on the commission until
their respective terms end. The last term of a current
elected member ends on January 31, 2022. When the last term
of a current elected member ends, the bill provides that the
resident members of the bar shall elect one eligible elector of
the state to the district judicial nominating commission for a
six-year, nonvoting term beginning February 1, 2022, and every
six years thereafter.
CHAIRPERSON OF STATE JUDICIAL NOMINATING COMMISSION OR
DISTRICT JUDICIAL NOMINATING COMMISSION. The bill repeals Code
section 46.6 relating to judicial officers with equal seniority
serving as chairperson of the state judicial nominating
commission or a district judicial nominating commission and
moves these provisions to new Code sections 46.2A and 46.4A
respectively.
The bill makes the justice of the supreme court, who is the
chairperson of the state judicial nominating commission, a
nonvoting, advisory member of the commission unless a vote ends
in a tie, in such case the bill provides that the chairperson
is eligible to cast the tie-breaking vote.
The bill also makes the district judge, who is chairperson
of the district judicial nominating commission, a nonvoting,
advisory member of the commission unless a vote ends in a
tie, in such case, the bill provides that the chairperson is
eligible to cast the tie-breaking vote.
EFFECTIVE DATE. The bill takes effect upon enactment.