An Act relating to private instruction by adding a reporting
requirement and requiring school districts to conduct health
and safety visits for the protection of children placed
under competent private instruction or private instruction.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. Section 299.4, subsection 1, Code 2017, is
amended to read as follows:
1. The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of a child
who is of compulsory attendance age, who places the child
under competent private instruction under section 299A.2, or
private instruction under section 299A.3, not in an accredited
school or a home school assistance program operated by a school
district or accredited nonpublic school, shall furnish to the
school district of residence a report in duplicate on forms
provided in the form and manner prescribed by the public school
district, to the district by September 1 of the school year in
which the child will be under competent private instruction
or private instruction. The secretary shall retain and file
one copy and forward the other copy to the district’s area
education agency. The report shall state the name and age
of the child, the period of time during which the child has
been or will be under competent private instruction or private
instruction for the year, an outline of the course of study,
texts used, and the name and address of the instructor. The
parent, guardian, or legal custodian of a child, who is placing
the child under competent private instruction or private
instruction for the first time, shall also provide the district
with evidence that the child has had the immunizations required
under section 139A.8, and, if the child is elementary school
age, a blood lead test in accordance with section 135.105D.
The term “outline of course of study” shall include subjects
covered, lesson plans, and time spent on the areas of study.
Sec. 2. Section 299A.3, Code 2017, is amended to read as
follows:
299A.3 Private instruction by nonlicensed person.
1. A parent, guardian, or legal custodian of a child of
compulsory attendance age providing private instruction to
the child shall complete and send, in a timely manner, the
report required under section 299.4 to the school district of
residence of the child.
2. A parent, guardian, or legal custodian of a child of
compulsory attendance age providing private instruction to the
child may meet all either of the following requirements:
1. Complete and send, in a timely manner, the report
required under section 299.4 to the school district of
residence of the child.
2. a. Ensure that the child under the parent’s, guardian’s,
or legal custodian’s instruction is evaluated annually to
determine whether the child is making adequate progress, as
defined in section 299A.6.
3. b. Ensure that the results of the child’s annual
evaluation are reported to the school district of residence
of the child and to the department of education by a date not
later than June 30 of each year in which the child is under
private instruction.
Sec. 3. NEW SECTION. 299A.13 Health and safety visits.
1. The board of directors of a school district shall
conduct quarterly home visits to check on the health and safety
of children located within the district who are receiving
competent private instruction or private instruction.
2. Home visits shall take place in the child’s residence
with the consent of the parent, guardian, or legal custodian
and an interview or observation of the child may be conducted.
If permission to enter the home to interview or observe the
child is refused, the juvenile court or district court upon
a showing of probable cause may authorize the person making
the home visit to enter the home and interview or observe the
child.
3. The superintendent of the school district shall
designate a person to carry out the duties assigned to the
school district under this section. The person designated
shall be a mandatory reporter, as defined in section 232.69,
subsection 1. The school district may collaborate with the
department of human services, including the local, county, and
service area officers of the department, in conducting the home
visits required under this section.
4. The department of education, in collaboration with the
department of human services, shall provide guidelines to
school districts for implementation of this section.
Sec. 4. STATE MANDATE FUNDING SPECIFIED. In accordance
with section 25B.2, subsection 3, the state cost of requiring
compliance with any state mandate included in this Act shall
be paid by a school district from state school foundation aid
received by the school district under section 257.16. This
specification of the payment of the state cost shall be deemed
to meet all of the state funding-related requirements of
section 25B.2, subsection 3, and no additional state funding
shall be necessary for the full implementation of this Act
by and enforcement of this Act against all affected school
districts.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
This bill requires the parent, guardian, or legal custodian
who places a child in private instruction to submit the same
report to the school district of residence that is required for
a child placed in competent private instruction, and requires
school districts to conduct quarterly home visits to check
on the health and safety of children placed under competent
private instruction or private instruction.
The parent, guardian, or legal custodian placing a child
under private instruction must furnish, by September 1 of the
academic year to the school district of residence, in the form
and manner prescribed by the school, a report that includes the
name and age of the child, the period of time during which the
child has been or will be under private instruction for the
year, an outline of the course of study, texts used, and the
name and address of the instructor.
As currently required for persons filing reports for a child
placed in competent private instruction, the first time such
a report is filed by a person on behalf of a child placed in
private instruction, the person must also provide the district
with evidence that the child has had the immunizations required
under Code section 139A.8, and, if the child is elementary
school age, a blood lead test. The term “outline of course of
study” includes subjects covered, lesson plans, and time spent
on the areas of study.
The home visits shall take place in the child’s residence
with the consent of the parent, guardian, or legal custodian
and an interview or observation of the child may be conducted.
If permission to enter the home to interview or observe the
child is refused, the juvenile court or district court upon
a showing of probable cause may authorize the person making
the home visit to enter the home and interview or observe the
child.
The superintendent of the school district shall designate a
person to carry out the duties assigned to the school district.
The person designated shall be a mandatory reporter of child
abuse. The school district may collaborate with the department
of human services, including the local, county, and service
area officers of the department. The department of education,
in collaboration with the department of human services, shall
provide guidelines to school districts for implementation of
the home visits for health and safety.
The bill may include a state mandate as defined in Code
section 25B.3. The bill requires that the state cost of
any state mandate included in the bill be paid by a school
district from state school foundation aid received by the
school district under Code section 257.16. The specification
is deemed to constitute state compliance with any state mandate
funding-related requirements of Code section 25B.2. The
inclusion of this specification is intended to reinstate the
requirement of political subdivisions to comply with any state
mandates included in the bill.