An Act relating to operating-while-intoxicated offenses causing
death or serious injury, and providing penalties.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. Section 707.6A, subsections 1 and 4, Code 2018,
are amended to read as follows:
1. A person commits a class “B” felony punishable by
imprisonment not to exceed fifty years when the person
unintentionally causes the death of another by operating a
motor vehicle while intoxicated, as prohibited by section
321J.2, subsection 1.
4. a. A person commits a class “C” felony when the person
unintentionally causes a serious injury, as defined in section
702.18, by the means described in subsection 1.
b. A person commits a class “D” felony when the person
unintentionally causes a serious injury, as defined in section
702.18, by any of the means described in subsection 1 or 2.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
This bill increases criminal penalties for
operating-while-intoxicated (OWI) offenses causing death or
serious injury.
Under current law, unintentionally causing the death of
another person by operating a motor vehicle while intoxicated
is a class “B” felony. Unless the maximum sentence for
a felony is prescribed by statute, a class “B” felony is
punishable by imprisonment for no more than 25 years. The
bill provides the maximum sentence for unintentionally causing
the death of another person by operating a motor vehicle while
intoxicated is imprisonment not to exceed 50 years.
Under current law, unintentionally causing serious injury
by operating a motor vehicle while intoxicated is a class “D”
felony. A class “D” felony is punishable by imprisonment for
no more than five years and a fine of at least $750 but not
more than $7,500. The bill provides that unintentionally
causing serious injury by operating a motor vehicle while
intoxicated is a class “C” felony. A class “C” felony is
punishable by imprisonment for no more than 10 years and a fine
of at least $1,000 but not more than $10,000. By operation of
law, Code section 811.1 would prohibit a person convicted of
unintentionally causing serious injury by operating a motor
vehicle while intoxicated from being admitted to bail during
the appeal process.
Under current law, a court is prohibited from deferring
judgment, deferring the sentence, or suspending the sentence of
any person convicted of an offense under Code section 707.6A,
subsections 1 and 4, involving an OWI offense (Code section
907.3). In addition, a person convicted of unintentionally
causing the death of another person by operating a motor
vehicle while intoxicated who also fails to remain at the scene
of an accident in violation of Code section 321.261 must be
denied parole or work release until the person has served at
least seven-tenths of the maximum term of the person’s sentence
(Code section 902.12).