An Act relating to demolition reserves on fire and casualty
claims on property and requesting an interim study on such
reserves.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. Section 515.139, subsection 1, unnumbered
paragraph 1, Code 2017, is amended to read as follows:
An insurer shall reserve ten twenty thousand dollars or ten
twenty percent, whichever amount is greater, of the payment for
damages to the property excluding personal property on which
the insurer has issued a fire and casualty insurance policy as
demolition cost reserve if the following are applicable:
Sec. 2. DEMOLITION RESERVE ON FIRE AND CASUALTY CLAIMS
ON PROPERTY —— STUDY REQUEST. The legislative council is
requested to establish an interim study committee for the
purpose of reviewing section 515.139 to consider whether the
statute adequately meets the needs of cities of various sizes
and geographic locations in the state, and reporting its
findings and recommendations, if any, to the general assembly.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
This bill provides that an insurer that has issued a fire
and casualty insurance policy for the payment of damages to
property, excluding personal property, located in a city
must reserve an amount equal to $20,000 or 20 percent of the
payment for damages, whichever is greater, as a demolition
cost reserve. Currently, the required amount is $10,000 or 10
percent of the payment, whichever is greater.
A city can claim proceeds from the reserve if the city incurs
costs to demolish a building where damage to the property
renders it uninhabitable or unfit for its purpose, without
repair, and proof of loss indicates that damage to the insured
structure or building exceeds 75 percent of the face value of
the policy covering the building or structure.
The bill also includes a request that the legislative
council establish an interim study committee for the purpose of
reviewing the demolition reserve statute to consider whether
the statute adequately meets the needs of cities of various
sizes and geographic locations in the state.