An Act relating to mediation of certain farm disputes prior to
the initiation of litigation.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. Section 13.15, subsection 2, paragraph b, Code
2017, is amended to read as follows:
b. The compensation of a mediator shall be no more than
twenty-five one hundred dollars per hour, and all parties shall
contribute an equal amount of the cost.
Sec. 2. Section 654A.4, subsection 2, Code 2017, is amended
to read as follows:
2. This chapter applies to a borrower who is a natural
person operating a farm or any corporation, limited liability
company, trust, or limited partnership as defined in section
9H.1.
Sec. 3. Section 654A.6, subsection 1, Code 2017, is amended
by adding the following new paragraph:
NEW PARAGRAPH. c. The coordinator may adopt rules
pursuant to chapter 17A to set a fee for filing a request
for mediation under this section. The filing fee shall not
exceed one hundred dollars, and shall be waived for any party
demonstrating financial hardship to the farm mediation service.
Sec. 4. Section 654A.7, subsection 2, Code 2017, is amended
by striking the subsection.
Sec. 5. Section 654A.11, subsection 1, Code 2017, is amended
to read as follows:
1. If an agreement is reached between the borrower and
the creditors, the mediator shall draft a written mediation
agreement, have it the mediation agreement signed by the
creditors and the borrower, and submit the mediation agreement
to the farm mediation service.
Sec. 6. Section 654B.1, Code 2017, is amended by adding the
following new subsection:
NEW SUBSECTION. 1A. “Coordinator” means the farm assistance
program coordinator provided in section 13.13.
Sec. 7. Section 654B.1, subsection 5, Code 2017, is amended
to read as follows:
5. “Farm resident” means a person holding an interest in
farmland, in fee, under a real estate contract, or under a
lease, if the person manages farming operations on the land. A
farm resident includes a natural person, or any corporation,
limited liability company, trust, or limited partnership as
defined in section 9H.1.
Sec. 8. Section 654B.3, subsection 1, Code 2017, is amended
by adding the following new paragraph:
NEW PARAGRAPH. c. The coordinator may adopt rules
pursuant to chapter 17A to set a fee for filing a request
for mediation under this section. The filing fee shall not
exceed one hundred dollars, and shall be waived for any party
demonstrating financial hardship to the farm mediation service.
Sec. 9. Section 654C.1, Code 2017, is amended by adding the
following new subsection:
NEW SUBSECTION. 1A. “Coordinator” means the farm assistance
program coordinator provided in section 13.13.
Sec. 10. Section 654C.2, Code 2017, is amended by adding the
following new subsection:
NEW SUBSECTION. 4. The coordinator may adopt rules
pursuant to chapter 17A to set a fee for filing a request
for mediation under this section. The filing fee shall not
exceed one hundred dollars, and shall be waived for any party
demonstrating financial hardship to the farm mediation service.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
This bill amends Code chapters 654A, 654B, and 654C, which
provide for mediation affecting agricultural producers. Code
chapter 654A requires mediation between creditors and farmers
who are borrowers prior to the enforcement of a legal action to
collect debt. Code chapter 654B requires mediation in disputes
involving farmers who provide care and feeding to livestock
under contract. Code chapter 654C allows for mediation between
producers and neighbors negotiating for the construction of
animal feeding operation structures closer than otherwise
legally allowed to the neighbor’s property. Under each of
the Code chapters, the farm mediation service conducts the
mediation.
Mediation is a method for parties in a dispute to reach
an accommodation prior to instituting a legal action. If an
accommodation is reached, the parties execute a mediation
agreement. If an accommodation is not reached, the mediator
issues a mediation release which allows a plaintiff to file a
claim for relief in district court. In the instance of Code
chapter 654C, legal action is not at issue because mediation is
initiated by the agricultural producer to obtain a waiver of a
statutory requirement.
Under current law, the compensation for the mediator is
no more than $25 per hour, and all parties contribute an
equal amount of the cost. The bill raises the mediator’s
compensation to no more than $100 per hour.
The bill provides that the farm assistance program
coordinator may adopt rules to set a fee for filing a mediation
request under Code section 654A.6 (mandatory mediation
proceedings), Code section 654B.3 (mandatory mediation
proceedings), and Code section 654C.2 (mediation proceedings).
The filing fee cannot exceed $100, and may be waived for any
party demonstrating financial hardship to the farm mediation
service.
Current law requires that the farm mediation service, after
receiving a mediation request for a dispute between a creditor
and a farmer who is a borrower, notify the borrower that legal
assistance may be available without charge through the legal
assistance for farmers program provided in Code chapter 13.
The bill eliminates this requirement.
Code chapter 654A applies to a borrower operating a farm
who is a natural person, corporation, trust, or limited
partnership. Code chapter 654B applies to farm residents,
which are natural persons, corporations, trusts, or limited
partnerships holding an interest in farmland and managing the
farming operations on the land. The bill provides that a
limited liability company may be a borrower for purposes of
Code chapter 654A and a farm resident for purposes of Code
chapter 654B.
Under Code chapter 654A, if a mediation agreement is
reached between the borrower and the creditors, the mediator
is required to draft a written mediation agreement, have it
signed by the creditors, and submit the agreement to the farm
mediation service. The bill requires that the borrower also
sign the mediation agreement.
The bill makes conforming changes.