An Act establishing a low-income program supplement for school
districts to provide programs serving low-income pupils.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. Section 257.1, subsection 2, paragraph b, Code
2017, is amended to read as follows:
b. For the budget year commencing July 1, 1999, and for each
succeeding budget year the regular program foundation base per
pupil is eighty-seven and five-tenths percent of the regular
program state cost per pupil. For the budget year commencing
July 1, 1991, and for each succeeding budget year the special
education support services foundation base is seventy-nine
percent of the special education support services state cost
per pupil. The combined foundation base is the sum of the
regular program foundation base, the special education support
services foundation base, the total teacher salary supplement
district cost, the total professional development supplement
district cost, the total early intervention supplement district
cost, the total teacher leadership supplement district cost,
the total area education agency teacher salary supplement
district cost, and the total area education agency professional
development supplement district cost, and the low-income
program supplement.
Sec. 2. Section 257.1, subsection 3, Code 2017, is amended
to read as follows:
3. Computations rounded. In making computations and
payments under this chapter, except in the case of computations
relating to funding of special education support services,
media services, and educational services provided through the
area education agencies, and the teacher salary supplement, the
professional development supplement, the early intervention
supplement, and the teacher leadership supplement, and the
low-income program supplement, the department of management
shall round amounts to the nearest whole dollar.
Sec. 3. Section 257.4, subsection 1, paragraph a, Code 2017,
is amended by adding the following new subparagraph:
NEW SUBPARAGRAPH. (10) The amount of the low-income program
supplement to be received by the school district under section
257.10A.
Sec. 4. NEW SECTION. 257.10A Low-income program supplement.
1. In order to provide additional funding to school
districts for programs serving low-income pupils, each district
shall receive for each budget year beginning on or after July
1, 2018, a low-income program supplement as calculated under
subsection 2.
2. Each school district’s low-income program supplement
shall be an amount equal to the number of pupils in the school
district, as reported by the school district on the basic
educational data survey for the base year, who are eligible for
free and reduced price meals under the federal National School
Lunch Act and the federal Child Nutrition Act of 1966, 42
U.S.C. §1751-1785, multiplied by four hundredths of the regular
program state cost per pupil for the budget year.
3. Amounts received under this section shall be utilized
by a school district to develop or maintain programs for
low-income pupils, including but not limited to before and
after school educational programs, summer education programs,
individual instructional assistance programs, tutoring and
mentoring programs, programs to reduce or waive student fees
required as part of the school district’s educational program,
or other programs or assistance approved by the department.
4. For purposes of this section, “low-income pupils” means
pupils who are eligible for free and reduced price meals under
the federal National School Lunch Act and the federal Child
Nutrition Act of 1966, 42 U.S.C. §1751-1785.
5. Providing programs under this section for low-income
pupils shall not restrict a school district from offering
participation in those programs by pupils who are not
low-income pupils, using other funds and resources available to
the school district for such purposes.
Sec. 5. Section 257.16, subsection 4, Code 2017, is amended
to read as follows:
4. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, if
the governor orders budget reductions in accordance with
section 8.31, the teacher salary supplement district cost,
the professional development supplement district cost, the
early intervention supplement district cost, and the teacher
leadership supplement district cost as calculated under
section 257.10, subsections 9, 10, 11, and 12, and the area
education agency teacher salary supplement district cost and
the area education agency professional development supplement
district cost as calculated under section 257.37A, subsections
1 and 2, and the low-income program supplement as calculated
under section 257.10A shall be paid in full as calculated and
the reductions in the appropriations provided in accordance
with this section shall be reduced from the remaining moneys
appropriated pursuant to this section and shall be distributed
on a per pupil basis calculated with the weighted enrollment
determined in accordance with section 257.6, subsection 5.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
This bill provides additional funding to school districts
for programs serving low-income pupils, as defined in the bill.
Under the bill, each district receives for each budget
year beginning on or after July 1, 2018, a low-income program
supplement. Each school district’s low-income program
supplement is an amount equal to the number of pupils in the
school district who are eligible for free and reduced price
meals multiplied by four hundredths of the regular program
state cost per pupil for the budget year.
Amounts received by a school district under the bill must be
utilized by a school district to develop or maintain programs
for low-income pupils, including but not limited to before and
after school educational programs, summer education programs,
individual instructional assistance programs, tutoring and
mentoring programs, programs to reduce or waive student fees
required as part of the school district’s educational program,
or other programs or assistance approved by the department.
The amount of the low-income program supplement is included
in the combined foundation base and is paid to each school
district as part of the state foundation aid.
The bill specifies that providing programs for low-income
pupils does not restrict a school district from offering
participation in those programs to pupils who are not
low-income pupils, using other funds available to the school
district.