An Act relating to professional standards for the certification
or designation of music therapists and providing penalties.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. NEW SECTION. 154G.1 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise
requires:
1. “Music therapist” means a person who holds one of the
following:
a. An active music therapist board-certified credential
granted by the certification board for music therapists.
b. A professional designation in good standing on the
national music therapy registry.
2. “Music therapy” means the clinical and evidence-based
use of music interventions to accomplish individualized goals
for people of all ages and ability levels within a therapeutic
relationship by a music therapist.
Sec. 2. NEW SECTION. 154G.2 Practice or use of title.
1. A person shall not profess to be a music therapist or
board-certified music therapist or use the initials “MT-BC”
or any other words, letters, abbreviations, or insignia
indicating or implying that the person is a music therapist
unless the person holds and maintains the music therapist
board-certified credential granted by the certification board
for music therapists or until January 20, 2020, is designated
as a registered music therapist, certified music therapist, or
advanced certified music therapist and is in good standing on
the national music therapy registry.
2. This chapter does not prohibit a person from using music
in the performance of the person’s profession or occupation if
incidental to the person’s profession or occupation and if the
person does not represent that the person is a music therapist.
3. A person who violates this section is guilty of a simple
misdemeanor.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
This bill requires any person claiming to be a music
therapist to hold a music therapist board-certified credential
granted by the certification board for music therapists or
until January 20, 2020, is designated as a registered music
therapist, or advanced certified music therapist and is in good
standing on the national music therapy registry. A person who
violates this bill is guilty of a simple misdemeanor. A simple
misdemeanor is punishable by confinement for no more than 30
days or a fine of at least $65 but not more than $625 or by
both.