An Act establishing the healthy Iowa program and including
effective date provisions.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. NEW SECTION. 135E.1 Findings and intent of the
general assembly.
1. The general assembly finds that all residents of the
state have the right to health care.
2. It is the intent of the general assembly:
a. To provide comprehensive universal single-payer health
care coverage and a health care cost control system for the
benefit of all residents of Iowa.
b. To establish the healthy Iowa program to provide
comprehensive, universal health coverage for every Iowa
resident funded by broad-based sources of revenue.
c. That the state obtain waivers and other approvals
relating to the Medicaid program, the healthy and well kids
in Iowa program, Medicare, the federal Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act, and any other federally regulated programs
related to the provision of health care so that any federal
funds and other subsidies that would otherwise be available to
the state, Iowa residents, and Iowa health care providers, is
instead paid by the federal government to the state of Iowa and
deposited in the healthy Iowa trust fund.
d. That the state incorporates health care coverage of
Iowa residents who are employed in other jurisdictions into
the waivers and other approvals involving federally regulated
programs related to the provision of health care.
e. That any funds obtained under waivers and other approvals
involving federally regulated programs related to the provision
of health care be used for health coverage that provides health
benefits equal to or exceeding the health benefits provided
under those programs, as well as other program modifications,
including elimination of cost sharing and insurance premiums.
f. That the healthy Iowa program replaces the Medicaid
program, the healthy and well kids in Iowa program, Medicare,
coverage provided through the federal Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act, and any other federally regulated programs
relating to the provision of health care, and that those
programs are merged into the healthy Iowa program, which will
operate as a true single-payer program.
g. That, even if all necessary waivers and approvals are not
obtained, the state maximize the approvals received and pool
multiple sources of funding to the greatest extent possible,
to make the provision of health care coverage and health care
under the healthy Iowa program as seamless as possible.
h. To extend the current benefits and current health care
coverage provided under the healthy and well kids in Iowa
program to all Iowa residents.
i. That the healthy Iowa program addresses the high cost
of prescription drugs to ensure that prescription drugs are
affordable for patients.
j. That neither health information technology nor clinical
practice guidelines limit the effective exercise of the
professional judgment of health care providers.
k. That health care providers be authorized to override
health information technology or clinical practice guidelines
if it is consistent with the treating health care provider’s
determination of medical necessity and if, in the professional
judgment of the health care provider, it is in the best
interest of the patient and consistent with the patient’s
wishes.
l. To develop a revenue plan for the healthy Iowa program,
in consultation with appropriate stakeholders, taking into
consideration anticipated federal revenue available for the
program.
m. To require that all federal revenue received for the
healthy Iowa program be deposited in an account within the
healthy Iowa trust fund to be known as the healthy Iowa trust
fund account.
Sec. 2. NEW SECTION. 135E.2 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise
requires:
1. “Affiliation” means any of the following:
a. A financial interest.
b. A position of governance, including membership on a board
of directors, regardless of compensation.
c. A relationship through which compensation is received.
d. A relationship for the provision of services as a
regulated lobbyist.
2. “Affordable Care Act” means the federal Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act (Pub. L. No. 111-148), as
amended by the federal Health Care and Education Reconciliation
Act of 2010 (Pub. L. No. 111-152), and any amendments to, or
regulations or guidance issued under, those Acts.
3. “Allied health practitioner” means a group of health
professionals who apply their expertise to prevent disease
transmission; diagnose, treat, and rehabilitate people of all
ages and in all specialties; and, with a range of technical and
support staff, deliver direct patient care, rehabilitation,
treatment, diagnosis, and health improvement interventions to
restore and maintain optimal physical, sensory, psychological,
cognitive, and social functions. “Allied health practitioner”
includes but is not limited to audiologists, physical
therapists, occupational therapists, social workers, and
radiographers.
4. “Board” means the healthy Iowa board which adopts rules
and establishes policy for and directs the agency regarding the
healthy Iowa program.
5. “Care coordination” means services provided by a care
coordinator under the healthy Iowa program.
6. “Care coordinator” means an individual or entity approved
by the healthy Iowa board to provide care coordination.
7. “Carrier” means carrier as defined in section 513B.2.
8. “Director” means the director of the healthy Iowa
program.
9. “Essential community provider” means a person or entity
acting as a safety net clinic, safety net health care provider,
or rural hospital.
10. “Federally matched public health program” means the
Medicaid program or the healthy and well kids in Iowa program
established in section 514I.3.
11. “Fund” means the healthy Iowa trust fund.
12. “Health care provider” means any of the following:
a. A person who is licensed, certified, registered, or
authorized to practice a health care profession in the state
pursuant to chapter 147A, 148, 148A, 148B, 148C, 148E, 148F,
148G, 149, 151, 152, 152A, 152B, 153, 154, 154A, 154B, 154C,
154D, 154F, 155, or 155A, who practices the profession in which
they are licensed, certified, registered, or authorized, and
who provides a health care service in this state.
b. A health care entity licensed under title IV that employs
or utilizes the health care services of a person described
in paragraph “a”, including but not limited to a hospital
licensed pursuant to chapter 135B, a health care facility
licensed pursuant to chapter 135C, a subacute mental health
care facility licensed pursuant to chapter 135G, a psychiatric
medical institution for children licensed pursuant to chapter
135H, a hospice program licensed pursuant to chapter 135J, an
entity providing emergency medical services pursuant to chapter
147A, and a pharmacy licensed pursuant to chapter 155A.
13. “Health care service” means any health care service,
including care coordination that is included as a benefit under
the healthy Iowa program.
14. “Health maintenance organization” means a health
maintenance organization as defined in section 514B.1.
15. “Healthy Iowa agency” means the healthy Iowa agency
created in this chapter as an independent agency to provide
comprehensive, universal single-payer health care coverage
and a health care cost control system for the benefit of all
residents of Iowa, and to implement the healthy Iowa program.
16. “Healthy Iowa program” means the healthy Iowa program
created in this chapter to provide comprehensive, universal
single-payer health care coverage.
17. “Implementation period” means the period during which
the healthy Iowa program is subject to special eligibility and
financing provisions until the healthy Iowa program is fully
implemented.
18. “Long-term care” means long-term care, treatment,
maintenance, or services as defined by the healthy Iowa board.
19. “Medicaid” means the Medicaid program established under
chapter 249A.
20. “Medicare” means the program established pursuant to
Tit. XVIII of the federal Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. §1395
et seq.
21. “Member” means an individual who is enrolled in the
healthy Iowa program.
22. “Out-of-state health care service” means a health
care service provided in person under any of the following
circumstances:
a. It is medically necessary that the health care service be
provided while the member is physically outside of this state
for a period of time not exceed ninety days.
b. It is clinically appropriate and necessary that the
health care service is provided outside this state because the
health care service can only be provided by a particular health
care provider physically located outside of this state.
23. “Participating health care provider” means an individual
or entity that is a health care provider qualified pursuant to
section 135E.15 that provides health care services to members
under the healthy Iowa program.
24. “Prescription drugs” means a controlled substance
requiring a prescription as defined in section 124.101,
subsection 5.
25. “Resident” means an individual, without regard to that
individual’s immigration status, whose primary place of abode
is in this state and who meets the Iowa residence requirements
adopted by the healthy Iowa board.
Sec. 3. NEW SECTION. 135E.3 Healthy Iowa agency and program
—— created.
1. A healthy Iowa agency is created as an independent
agency which shall be responsible for the planning,
development, implementation, and regulation of the provision of
comprehensive, universal single-payer health care coverage in
this state under the healthy Iowa program and of a health care
cost control system for the benefit of all residents.
2. The purposes of the healthy Iowa agency include all of
the following:
a. To create the healthy Iowa program.
b. To provide comprehensive, universal single-payer health
care services for all residents.
c. To provide a health care cost control system for the
benefit of all residents.
d. To provide choice of and access to health care
coordinators and health care providers for all residents.
e. To provide broad-based public financing of health care
services for all residents.
f. To establish mechanisms for participating health care
providers to collectively negotiate with the healthy Iowa
program regarding any matter relating to the administration
of the healthy Iowa program, including but not limited to
rates of payment for health care services, rates of payment
for prescription drugs and nonprescription drugs, and payment
methodologies.
g. To ensure transparency and accountability of the healthy
Iowa program to the public.
h. To provide for the collection of data to promote
transparency, assess adherence to patient care standards
established under this chapter, compare patient outcomes, and
review utilization of health care services reimbursed through
the healthy Iowa program.
3. This chapter and any rule or policy adopted under this
chapter shall not be construed, is not intended as, and shall
not imply, a change or impact in any way on the authority of any
of the following:
a. The authority of a licensing board or other agencies of
this state otherwise has relative to the provision of health
care services or health care providers under law.
b. The authority the healthy Iowa program, the healthy Iowa
board, a licensing board, the department of public health, or
the department of inspections and appeals has to establish or
revise licensure standards for health care providers.
c. The authority the healthy Iowa program has to carry out
any function not authorized by waivers.
d. The authority an employer has to create an employment
benefit or to require, prohibit, or limit the provision of any
employment benefit.
4. This chapter shall not be construed to allow the healthy
Iowa program, other agencies of this state, local agencies,
or public employees, acting under color of law, to provide or
disclose to anyone, including but not limited to the federal
government, any personally identifiable information obtained
by the healthy Iowa program, including but not limited to a
person’s religious beliefs, practices, or affiliation, national
origin, ethnicity, or immigration status, for law enforcement
or immigration purposes.
5. This chapter shall not be construed to allow law
enforcement agencies to use healthy Iowa program moneys,
facilities, property, equipment, or personnel to investigate,
enforce, or assist in the investigation or enforcement of any
criminal, civil, or administrative violation or warrant for a
violation of any requirement that individuals register with the
federal government or any federal agency based on religion,
national origin, ethnicity, or immigration status.
Sec. 4. NEW SECTION. 135E.4 Healthy Iowa board —— created.
1. A healthy Iowa board is created consisting of the
following voting members:
a. Four public members appointed by the governor, subject
to confirmation by the senate.
b. Two public members appointed by the senate majority
leader subject to section 2.32A.
c. Two public members appointed by the speaker of the house
of representatives subject to section 2.32A.
2. The director of human services or the director’s designee
shall serve as an ex officio member of the board.
3. The voting members shall serve four-year staggered
terms. A vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired portion of
the term and in the same manner as the original appointment.
Any member may be reappointed for an additional term.
4. Members of the board shall not receive compensation as a
member of the board but are entitled to receive reimbursement
of actual expenses incurred in the discharge of their duties.
Public members of the board are also eligible to receive
compensation as provided in section 7E.6.
5. In making appointments under this section, an appointing
authority shall do all of the following:
a. Assure that the appointee has demonstrated and
acknowledged expertise in health care.
b. Consider the expertise of the other members of the
board and attempt to make appointments so that the board’s
composition reflects a diversity of expertise in various
aspects of health care services.
c. Consider the cultural, ethnic, and geographical diversity
of this state so that the board’s composition reflects the
communities of this state.
d. Assure that the board’s composition is comprised of all
of the following:
(1) At least one representative of a labor organization
representing registered nurses.
(2) At least one representative of the general public.
(3) At least one representative of a labor organization not
representing registered nurses.
(4) At least one representative of the health care provider
community.
6. The board shall determine the time, location, and
frequency of the board’s meetings. Five members of the board
constitute a quorum and the affirmative vote of a majority of
the voting members is necessary for any substantive action to
be taken by the board.
7. The members of the board shall elect a chairperson on an
annual basis from among the membership of the board.
8. A member of the board may be removed for incompetence,
misconduct, or failure to perform the duties of the position.
9. The board shall approve all contracts entered into
pursuant to this chapter. All contracts entered into pursuant
to this chapter shall be made available to the public.
10. The board may receive and accept grants, loans, or
advances of moneys from any person and may receive and accept
from any source contributions of moneys, property, labor, or
any other thing of value, to be held, used, and applied for the
purposes of the healthy Iowa program.
11. A member of the board shall do all of the following:
a. Meet the requirements of this chapter and all applicable
state and federal laws and regulations.
b. Serve the public interest of the individuals, employers,
and taxpayers seeking health care coverage through the healthy
Iowa healthy Iowa program.
c. Ensure the sound operation and fiscal solvency of the
healthy Iowa program.
12. A member of the board, within the two-year period
immediately preceding the member’s appointment, while serving
on the board, and for two years immediately after the end
of the member’s term, and staff of the board, shall not be
employed or have been employed in any capacity by, a consultant
to a member of the board of, have an affiliation with, receive
compensation from, or otherwise be a representative of any of
the following:
a. A health care provider, unless the member or staff
practices a health care profession as an employee of another
health care provider.
b. A pharmaceutical company.
c. A medical equipment company.
d. An insurance company.
e. A carrier, an insurance producer, a third-party
administrator, a managed care organization, or any other person
contracting directly with the healthy Iowa program.
f. A member, a board member, or an employee of a trade
association of health care facilities, health clinics, health
care providers, carriers, insurance producers, third-party
administrators, managed care organizations, or any association
of entities in a position to contract directly with the
healthy Iowa program, unless the member or employee receives no
compensation for rendering services as a health care provider
and does not have an ownership interest in a health care
practice.
13. A member of the board shall perform the member’s duties
in good faith, in the manner the member reasonably believes
to be in the best interest of the healthy Iowa program, and
without intentional or reckless disregard of the care an
ordinarily prudent person in a like position would use under
similar circumstances. A member of the board who performs the
member’s duties in accordance with the standards specified in
this subsection shall not be liable personally for actions
taken as a member when performed in good faith, without intent
to defraud, and in connection with the administration of this
chapter or actions or conduct related to this chapter.
14. A member of the board shall be subject to chapter 68B.
In addition to the disclosures required pursuant to chapter
68B, a member of the board shall disclose to the board and
to the public any relationship that the member has with a
health care provider, pharmaceutical company, medical equipment
company, insurance company, carrier, insurance producer,
third-party administrator, managed care organization, or other
entity in an industry involved in matters likely to come before
the board.
15. On all matters that come before the board, a member
shall do all of the following:
a. Adhere strictly to the conflict of interest provisions
of section 68B.2A.
b. Provide full disclosure to the board and the public on
any matter that gives rise to a potential conflict of interest
and the manner in which the member will comply with public
disclosure required by chapter 68B and rules adopted pursuant
to chapter 68B to avoid any conflict of interest or appearance
of a conflict of interest.
16. A member of the board shall not have an interest, direct
or indirect, in a contract for the purchase of goods, including
materials and profits, or for the performance of services for
the healthy Iowa program. A contract entered into in violation
of this section is voidable.
Sec. 5. NEW SECTION. 135E.5 Director —— appointment.
1. a. The board shall appoint a director of the healthy
Iowa program.
b. The director shall serve at the pleasure of the board.
c. The board shall determine the appropriate compensation
for the director.
2. Under the direction of and with the approval of the
board, the director shall administer this chapter. The
director shall do all of the following:
a. Act as the chief administrative officer of the healthy
Iowa program, including the healthy Iowa trust fund.
b. Direct, organize, administer, and manage the internal
operations of the healthy Iowa program and the board, and
establish guidelines and procedures to promote the orderly and
efficient administration of the healthy Iowa agency.
c. Perform all duties necessary to comply with and carry out
the provisions of this chapter, other state law, and federal
law.
d. Recommend to the board proposed rules necessary to
administer the healthy Iowa program.
e. Prepare a budget for the healthy Iowa program and prepare
reports as required by law.
f. Present the healthy Iowa agency’s proposed budget to the
board prior to December 31 of each year.
g. Appoint the administrators within the healthy Iowa
program.
h. Provide for the receipt and disbursement of federal
moneys allocated to the state and its political subdivisions
for health care services and coverage purposes.
i. Include in the healthy Iowa program’s annual budget all
estimated federal funds to be received or allocated to the
healthy Iowa program.
j. Employ, or designate another to employ, personnel
as necessary to carry out the duties and responsibilities
prescribed under this chapter consistent with the merit system
provisions of chapter 8A, subchapter IV.
k. As necessary, retain as independent contractors
attorneys, financial consultants, and any other professionals
or consultants necessary to carry out the planning,
development, and operations of the healthy Iowa program and the
provisions of this chapter.
3. The director or the director’s designee shall
give preference in hiring under this section to all
individuals displaced or unemployed as a direct result of the
implementation of the healthy Iowa program.
Sec. 6. NEW SECTION. 135E.6 Board and director —— duties
—— powers.
1. Subject to any limitations under this chapter or other
applicable law, the enumeration of specific powers in this
chapter is not intended to restrict the board’s power to take
any lawful action that the board determines is necessary
or convenient to carry out the functions authorized by the
Affordable Care Act and consistent with the purposes of the
healthy Iowa program.
2. The board shall do all of the following:
a. Adopt rules pursuant to chapter 17A to implement and
administer this chapter.
b. Consult with and solicit input from the healthy Iowa
advisory committee and any other person as the board determines
appropriate.
c. Promote the public understanding and awareness of
available benefits and options through the healthy Iowa
program.
d. Avoid jeopardizing federal financial participation in the
programs that are incorporated into the healthy Iowa program.
e. Ensure that there is adequate funding to meet the health
care service needs of residents and to compensate health care
providers that participate in the healthy Iowa program.
f. Evaluate requests for capital expenses required to meet
the health care service needs of residents.
g. Approve the benefits provided by the healthy Iowa
program.
h. Evaluate the performance of the healthy Iowa program.
i. Evaluate and make recommendations to the general assembly
on any legislation related to the healthy Iowa program.
j. Guarantee that mechanisms for public feedback are
accessible and nondiscriminatory.
k. Develop a plan to coordinate the activities of the
healthy Iowa program with the activities of the department of
public health’s bureau of health planning and the department
of human services’ mental health planning and advisory council
to ensure appropriate planning for the effective delivery and
equitable distribution of health care services throughout the
state.
l. Provide grants from moneys in the healthy Iowa trust
fund or moneys otherwise appropriated for this purpose to the
health planning programs established by the bureau of health
planning of the department of public health or the mental
health planning and advisory council of the department of human
services to support the operation of those health planning
programs.
m. Allocate moneys from the healthy Iowa trust fund
or moneys otherwise appropriated for this purpose to the
department of human services or the department of education
workforce training and economic development fund to be used for
all of the following purposes:
(1) A program for retraining and assisting job transition
for individuals employed or previously employed in the fields
of health insurance, health care service plans, and other
third-party payments for health care services.
(2) A program for retraining and assisting job transition
for those individuals employed or previously employed in
fields providing services to health care providers to address
the needs of third-party payers for health care services,
whose jobs may be or have been ended as a result of the
implementation of the healthy Iowa program.
n. Organize, administer, and market the healthy Iowa program
and program services as a single-payer program under the name
“Healthy Iowa” or any other name as the board determines.
o. Sue, be sued, plead, and be impleaded.
p. Apply for, accept, and expend federal, state, or private
moneys or contracts for the implementation of the healthy Iowa
program or other state or federal health care programs for
residents.
q. Maintain an office at a place designated by the board.
r. Create subcommittees from among its members.
s. Establish divisions and subdivisions within the healthy
Iowa program.
t. Make agreements with a grantor or payor of moneys,
property, or services, including agreements to perform any
study, plan, demonstration, or project.
u. Enter into any agreements, contracts, or memoranda
of understanding and execute the instruments necessary or
convenient to manage its own affairs and carry out the purposes
of this chapter, including but not limited to contracts with
health care providers and care coordinators.
v. Share information with relevant state entities,
consistent with the confidentiality provisions in this chapter,
necessary for the administration of the healthy Iowa program.
w. Subject to the limitations of this chapter, exercise any
other power that is reasonably necessary or convenient to carry
out the purposes of this chapter.
x. Adopt rules pursuant to chapter 17A regarding residency
requirements under the healthy Iowa program. In adopting
such rules, the board shall be guided by the principles and
requirements set forth in the Medicaid program without regard
to immigration status.
y. Contract with not-for-profit organizations to provide any
of the following:
(1) Assistance to consumers in the selection of a care
coordinator, enrollment, obtaining of health care services,
disenrollment, and other matters relating to the healthy Iowa
program.
(2) Assistance to health care providers providing, seeking,
or considering whether to provide health care services under
the healthy Iowa program.
z. Delegate to the director any of its duties under this
section subject to all of the following:
(1) The board shall ensure that any entity under a contract
or other agreement with the healthy Iowa program complies with
the provisions of this chapter when performing services on
behalf of the healthy Iowa program.
(2) The operations of the healthy Iowa program are subject
to the provisions of this chapter whether the operations are
performed directly by the healthy Iowa program or through an
entity under a contract or other agreement with the healthy
Iowa program.
Sec. 7. NEW SECTION. 135E.7 Healthy Iowa program ——
implementation —— coordination with other health care coverage.
1. The board shall determine the date of implementation of
the healthy Iowa program when individuals may begin enrolling
in the healthy Iowa program and the date the implementation
period ends.
2. An insurer, carrier, or health maintenance organization
shall not offer benefits or cover any services for which
coverage is offered to individuals under the healthy Iowa
program.
3. An insurer, carrier, or health maintenance organization
that is issued a certificate of authority by the commissioner
of insurance may offer only the following:
a. Benefits that do not duplicate the health care services
covered by the healthy Iowa program.
b. Benefits available to individuals and their families who
are employed or self-employed in this state but who are not
residents.
c. Benefits available during the implementation period
to individuals who enroll or may enroll in the healthy Iowa
program.
4. This chapter shall not prohibit a resident who is
employed outside this state from choosing to receive health
insurance benefits through the resident’s employer and from
opting out of participation in the healthy Iowa program.
5. After the end of the implementation period, board members
shall enroll as members of the healthy Iowa program.
6. a. No later than July 1, 2020, the board shall develop
a proposal, consistent with the principles of this chapter,
for provision by the healthy Iowa program of long-term care
coverage, including the development of a proposal, consistent
with the principles of this chapter, for its funding.
b. In developing the proposal required in paragraph “a”,
the board shall consult with a special advisory committee,
appointed by the chairperson of the board, that includes
representatives of consumers and potential consumers of
long-term care, providers of long-term care, members of
organized labor, and other interested parties.
7. The board shall develop proposals for all of the
following:
a. Accommodating employer retiree health benefits for people
who have been members of the healthy Iowa program but live as
retirees outside this state.
b. Accommodating employer retiree health benefits for people
who earned or accrued those benefits while residing in this
state prior to the implementation of the healthy Iowa program
and who live as retirees outside this state.
c. For healthy Iowa program coverage of health care services
covered under the state workers’ compensation law, including
whether and how to continue funding for those health care
services under the workers’ compensation law and whether and
how to incorporate an element of experience rating.
Sec. 8. NEW SECTION. 135E.8 Data collection.
1. The board shall require and enforce the collection
and availability of all of the following data to promote
transparency, assess adherence to patient care standards,
compare patient outcomes, and review utilization of health care
services paid for by the healthy Iowa program:
a. Inpatient discharge data, including acuity and risk of
mortality.
b. Emergency department, ambulatory surgery, and other
outpatient department data, including charge data, length of
stay, and patients’ unit of observation.
c. Hospital annual financial data, including all of the
following:
(1) Community benefits by hospital in dollar value.
(2) Number of employees and classification by hospital
unit.
(3) Number of hours worked by hospital unit.
(4) Employee wage information by job title and hospital
unit.
(5) Number of registered nurses per staffed bed by hospital
unit.
(6) Type and value of health information technology.
(7) Annual spending on health information technology,
including purchases, upgrades, and maintenance.
d. Physician services and office visits, including charge
data.
e. Prescription drug cost and charge data for prescription
drugs prescribed and dispensed through hospitals or a
physician’s office.
2. Data collected under subsection 1 shall be reported
to the healthy Iowa program and to the public health data
management program of the department of public health.
3. The board shall make all disclosed data collected under
subsection 1 publicly available and searchable through an
internet site and through the department of public health’s
public health data management program.
4. The board shall, directly and through grants to
not-for-profit entities, conduct programs using data collected
through the healthy Iowa program to promote and protect public,
environmental, and occupational health, including cooperation
with other data collection and research programs of the
department of public health consistent with this chapter and
otherwise applicable law.
5. Prior to the end of the healthy Iowa program
implementation period, the board shall provide for the
collection and availability of all of the following data on the
number of patients served by hospitals and the dollar value of
the care provided, at cost, for all of the following categories
of data items:
a. Patients receiving charity care.
b. Contractual adjustments of county and indigent programs,
including traditional and managed care.
c. Bad debt.
6. The healthy Iowa program, any state or local agency,
or any public employee acting under color of law shall not
provide or disclose to anyone, including but not limited to the
federal government, any personally identifiable information
obtained under this section, including but not limited to a
person’s religious beliefs, practices, or affiliation, national
origin, ethnicity, or immigration status for law enforcement
or immigration purposes.
Sec. 9. NEW SECTION. 135E.9 Healthy Iowa advisory committee
—— established.
1. A healthy Iowa advisory committee for the healthy Iowa
program is established.
2. The healthy Iowa advisory committee shall consist of all
of the following voting members:
a. (1) Four physicians who are board certified in the
individual’s specialty, at least one of whom shall be a
psychiatrist.
(2) The physician members shall include all of the
following:
(a) One physician appointed by the senate majority leader.
(b) One physician appointed by the governor.
(c) Two physicians appointed by the speaker of the house of
representatives who are primary care providers.
b. Two registered nurses appointed by the senate majority
leader.
c. One licensed allied health practitioner appointed by the
speaker of the house of representatives.
d. One mental health care provider appointed by the senate
majority leader.
e. One dentist appointed by the governor.
f. One representative of private hospitals appointed by the
governor.
g. One representative of public hospitals appointed by the
governor.
h. (1) Four consumers of health care services.
(2) The consumer members shall include all of the following,
one of whom shall be a person with a disability:
(a) Two consumers appointed by the governor.
(b) One consumer appointed by the senate majority leader who
is a healthy Iowa program member and who is sixty-five years of
age or older.
(c) One consumer appointed by the speaker of the house of
representatives.
i. One representative of organized labor appointed by the
speaker of the house of representatives.
j. One representative of community providers appointed by
the senate majority leader.
k. One member of organized labor appointed by the senate
majority leader.
l. One representative of a business that employs less than
twenty-five people, appointed by the governor.
m. One representative of a business that employs more than
two hundred fifty people, appointed by the speaker of the house
of representatives.
n. One pharmacist appointed by the speaker of the house of
representatives.
3. Appointed members, except for consumer members, shall
have worked in the field they represent for a period of at
least two years prior to being appointed.
4. Members shall serve four-year staggered terms. A vacancy
shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term and in
the same manner as the original appointment. Any member may
be reappointed for an additional term, but shall not serve for
more than two consecutive full terms.
5. Members shall not receive compensation as a member
but are entitled to receive reimbursement of actual expenses
incurred in the discharge of their duties. Public members are
also eligible to receive compensation as provided in section
7E.6.
6. In making appointments of members under this section, the
appointing authority shall make good-faith efforts to ensure
that their appointments, as a whole, reflect, to the greatest
extent feasible, the social and geographic diversity of this
state.
7. The healthy Iowa advisory committee shall advise the
board on all matters of policy related to the healthy Iowa
program.
8. a. The healthy Iowa advisory committee shall meet at
least six times per year in a place convenient to the public
in accordance with chapter 21 and records of the healthy
Iowa advisory committee shall be subject to the open records
requirements of chapter 22.
b. Eleven members of the healthy Iowa advisory committee
constitute a quorum and the affirmative vote of at least twelve
voting members is necessary for any substantive action to be
taken.
9. The healthy Iowa advisory committee shall elect a
chairperson from among its membership who shall serve two years
and who may be reelected as chairperson for an additional two
years.
10. Members shall not use for personal benefit any
information that is filed with, or obtained by, the healthy
Iowa advisory committee and that is not generally available to
the public.
11. A member shall perform the member’s duties in good
faith, in the manner the member reasonably believes to be in
the best interest of the healthy Iowa program, and without
intentional or reckless disregard of the care an ordinarily
prudent person in a like position would use under similar
circumstances. A member who performs the member’s duties in
accordance with this subsection shall not be liable personally
for actions taken as a member when done in good faith, without
intent to defraud, and in connection with the administration of
this chapter or actions or conduct related to this chapter.
12. A member shall be subject to the provisions of chapter
68B. In addition to the disclosures required pursuant to
chapter 68B, a member shall disclose to the healthy Iowa
advisory committee and to the public any relationship
that the member has with a health care provider, health
clinic, pharmaceutical company, medical equipment company,
insurance company, carrier, insurance producer, third-party
administrator, managed care organization, or other entity in an
industry involved in matters likely to come before the healthy
Iowa advisory committee.
13. On all matters that come before the healthy Iowa
advisory committee, members shall do all of the following:
a. Adhere strictly to the conflict of interest provisions
of section 68B.2A.
b. Provide full disclosure to the healthy Iowa advisory
committee and the public on any matter that gives rise to a
potential conflict of interest and the manner in which the
member will comply with public disclosure required by chapter
68B and rules adopted pursuant to chapter 68B to avoid any
conflict of interest or appearance of a conflict of interest.
14. A member shall not have an interest, direct or indirect,
in a contract for the purchase of goods, including materials
and profits, and the performance of services for the healthy
Iowa program or the healthy Iowa advisory committee. A
contract entered into in violation of this section is void.
15. A member may be removed for incompetence, misconduct, or
failure to perform the duties of the position.
Sec. 10. NEW SECTION. 135E.10 Eligibility and enrollment
—— generally.
1. Each resident is eligible and entitled to enroll as a
member in and receive benefits for health care services covered
by the healthy Iowa program.
2. A member shall not pay any fee, payment, or other charge
for enrolling in or being a member.
3. A participating health care provider or participating
care coordinator shall not do any of the following:
a. Require members to pay any premium, copayment,
coinsurance, deductible, or any other form of cost sharing for
any covered health care services.
b. Use preexisting medical conditions to determine the
eligibility of a member to receive benefits for health care
services covered by the program.
c. Refuse to provide health care services to a member
on the basis of age, citizenship, claims experience, color,
creed, familial status, gender identity, genetic information,
geography, health status, immigration status, marital status,
medical condition, medical history, mental disability, military
or veteran status, national origin, physical disability,
primary language, race, receipt of health care, religion, sex,
sexual orientation, or source of income.
d. A college, university, or other institution of higher
education in this state may purchase coverage under the healthy
Iowa program for a student, or a student’s dependent, who is
not a resident.
Sec. 11. NEW SECTION. 135E.11 Eligibility and enrollment ——
cross border employees.
1. If a resident is employed outside this state by an
employer that is subject to the laws of this state, the
employer and resident shall pay any payroll premium adopted
under this chapter as if the employment were in this state.
2. If a resident is employed outside this state by an
employer that is not subject to the laws of this state,
either the employer and resident may comply with any payroll
premium adopted under this chapter as if the employee were
employed in this state, or the resident shall pay the payroll
premium adopted under this chapter as if the resident were
self-employed in this state.
3. Any payroll premium adopted under this chapter applies
to all of the following:
a. A resident of another state employed in this state.
b. A resident of another state self-employed in this state.
4. a. A resident who is employed outside this state
may choose to receive health insurance benefits through the
resident’s employer and opt out of participation in the healthy
Iowa program.
b. The board shall develop and implement rules establishing
procedures for state residents employed outside this state to
opt out of participation in the healthy Iowa program.
5. If any provision of this section or application of the
provision to any person or circumstance is held to violate the
federal Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 in any
court of competent jurisdiction, the provision or application
found invalid shall be null and void and the invalidity shall
not affect other provisions or any other application of this
chapter that can be given effect without the invalid provision
or application.
Sec. 12. NEW SECTION. 135E.12 Health benefit credit.
1. a. If an individual who is a resident of another state
is employed in this state, the individual and the individual’s
employer may be eligible for a credit against any payroll
premium payment requirement adopted under this chapter that the
individual or the individual’s employer would otherwise pay
relative to that individual.
b. The credit available under this subsection shall be for
the amount spent on health benefits for the individual that
would otherwise be covered by the healthy Iowa program if that
individual were a member of the healthy Iowa program.
c. The credit available under this subsection shall be
distributed between the individual and employer in the same
proportion as the actual spending by each for the health
benefits.
d. An employer and employee may apply their respective
portion of the credit available under this subsection to their
respective portion of any payroll premium payment requirement
adopted under this chapter.
2. a. If an individual who is a resident of another state
is self-employed in this state, the individual is eligible
for a credit against any payroll premium payment requirement
adopted under this chapter that the individual would otherwise
pay.
b. Credit taken under this subsection shall be in the
amount that the individual spends on health benefits that
would otherwise be covered by the healthy Iowa program if the
individual were a member of the healthy Iowa program.
3. a. The credit available for non-employment-based
spending by an individual under subsection 2 is limited to
spending for health benefits.
b. An individual shall not be eligible for credit under
subsection 2 for out-of-pocket health care services spending.
4. Credit under this section is available regardless of
the cost or comprehensiveness of the health benefits, and
regardless of the form of the health benefits.
5. a. An employer or individual is eligible for credit
under this section only against payroll premiums payment
requirement adopted under this chapter.
b. An employer or individual shall not apply any health
benefits spending in excess of the payroll premium payment
requirement to other tax liability.
6. If any provision of this section or application of the
provision to any person or circumstance is held to violate the
federal Employee Retirement Income Security Act in any court
of competent jurisdiction, the provision or the application
found invalid shall be null and void and the invalidity shall
not affect other provisions or any other application of this
chapter that can be given effect without the invalid provision
or application.
Sec. 13. NEW SECTION. 135E.13 Covered benefits.
1. a. All members are eligible to receive covered health
care services benefits under the program.
b. Covered health care services benefits under the program
include all medical care that is medically necessary as
determined by the member’s treating physician in accordance
with the program standards established in section 135E.19 and
by the board.
c. A member’s treating physician shall be a person
licensed to engage in the practice of medicine and surgery or
osteopathic medicine and surgery pursuant to chapter 148.
2. Covered health care services benefits for members
include but are not limited to all of the following:
a. Licensed inpatient and licensed outpatient medical and
health care facility services.
b. Inpatient and outpatient health care services.
c. Diagnostic imaging, laboratory services, and other
diagnostic and evaluative services.
d. Medical equipment, appliances, and assistive technology,
including prosthetics, eyeglasses, and hearing aids and
the repair, technical support, and customization needed for
individual use.
e. Inpatient and outpatient rehabilitative care.
f. Emergency care services.
g. Emergency transportation.
h. Necessary transportation for health care services for
persons with disabilities or who may qualify as low-income.
i. Child and adult immunizations and preventive care.
j. Health and wellness education.
k. Hospice care.
l. Care in a skilled nursing facility.
m. Home health care, including home health care provided in
an assisted living facility.
n. Mental health services.
o. Substance abuse treatment.
p. Dental care.
q. Vision care.
r. Prescription drugs.
s. Pediatric care.
t. Prenatal and postnatal care.
u. Podiatric care.
v. Chiropractic care.
w. Acupuncture.
x. Therapies that are shown by the United States national
institutes of health, national center for complementary and
integrative health to be safe and effective.
y. Blood and blood products.
z. Dialysis.
aa. Adult day care.
ab. Rehabilitative and habilitative services.
ac. Ancillary health care or social services previously
covered by integrated health homes as determined under Iowa
Medicaid enterprise administrative rules and as designated
under 42 U.S.C. §1396w-4.
ad. Case management and care coordination.
ae. Language interpretation and translation for health care
services, including sign language and braille or other services
needed for individuals with communication barriers.
af. Health care and long-term supportive services covered
under Medicaid or the healthy and well kids in Iowa program on
June 30, 2017.
ag. All of the following health care services required
to be covered under any of the following provisions, without
regard to whether the member would otherwise be eligible for or
covered by the program or source referred to:
(1) The healthy and well kids in Iowa program pursuant to
chapter 514I.
(2) The Medicaid program.
(3) The federal Medicare program pursuant to Tit. XVIII of
the federal Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. §1395 et seq.
(4) A health maintenance organization as defined in section
514B.1.
(5) A managed health care program as defined by rule of
the department of human services, including health maintenance
organizations, prepaid health plans, the Medicaid patient
access to service system, Iowa plan for behavioral health,
programs of all-inclusive care for the elderly, Iowa health
link, and the Iowa health and wellness plan.
ah. Any additional health care services authorized by the
board.
ai. All essential health benefits mandated by the Affordable
Care Act as of January 1, 2017.
Sec. 14. NEW SECTION. 135E.14 Covered benefits ——
additions.
1. The board, on a regular basis, shall evaluate whether
covered benefits under the healthy Iowa program should be
improved or adjusted to promote the health of beneficiaries,
account for changes in medical practice or new information from
medical research, or respond to other relevant developments in
health science. In carrying out this duty, the board shall
consult with the persons described in subsection 2 on all of
the following:
a. Identifying specific complementary and integrative
medicine practices that, on the basis of research findings or
promising clinical interventions, are appropriate to include as
benefits under the healthy Iowa program package.
b. Identifying barriers to the effective provision and
integration of such practices into the delivery of health care,
and identifying mechanisms for overcoming such barriers.
2. The board shall consult with all of the following when
carrying out the requirements of subsection 1:
a. Institutions of higher education, private research
institutes, and individual researchers with extensive
experience in complementary and alternative medicine and the
integration of such practices into the delivery of health care.
b. Nationally recognized providers of complementary and
integrative medicine.
c. Such other officials, entities, and individuals with
expertise in complementary and integrative medicine as the
board determines appropriate.
3. a. Health care providers and members may petition the
board to improve or adjust covered benefits under the healthy
Iowa program.
b. The board shall develop and adopt rules pursuant to
chapter 17A establishing procedures for members to petition the
board to improve or adjust covered benefits under the healthy
Iowa program.
Sec. 15. NEW SECTION. 135E.15 Delivery of care ——
participating health care providers.
1. Any health care provider is qualified to participate in
the healthy Iowa program if the health care provider meets all
of the following criteria:
a. The health care provider is licensed to practice in this
state and is otherwise in good standing.
b. The health care provider’s services are performed while
physically present in this state.
c. The health care provider agrees to accept program rates
as payment in full for all covered health care services.
2. The board shall establish and maintain procedures and
standards for recognizing health care providers located outside
this state for purposes of providing coverage under the program
for members who require out-of-state health care services while
the member is physically outside this state for a period of
time not to exceed ninety days.
3. Any health care provider qualified to participate under
this section may provide covered health care services under the
healthy Iowa program as long as the health care provider is
legally authorized to perform the health care service for the
individual and under the circumstances involved.
4. A member may choose to receive health care services
under the healthy Iowa program from any participating provider,
consistent with all of the following:
a. Provisions of this section.
b. The willingness or availability of the health care
provider.
c. Provisions of this chapter prohibiting discrimination
against members.
d. The appropriate clinically relevant circumstances and
standards.
5. The board may establish and maintain procedures for
member enrollment and disenrollment with participating health
care providers that are health maintenance organizations, group
medical practices, or essential community providers that offer
comprehensive services.
6. a. Participating health care providers shall not use
health information technology or clinical practice guidelines
that limit the effective exercise of the professional judgment
of a physician or registered nurse.
b. A physician or registered nurse may override health
information technology and clinical practice guidelines if all
of the following criteria are met:
(1) It is consistent with the treating physician’s or
registered nurse’s determination of medical necessity.
(2) In the professional judgment of the treating physician
or registered nurse, it is in the best interest of the patient
and consistent with the patient’s wishes.
7. The board shall establish and maintain procedures and
standards for recognizing health care providers located outside
this state for purposes of providing coverage under the healthy
Iowa program for health care services provided outside this
state under the healthy Iowa program.
Sec. 16. NEW SECTION. 135E.16 Delivery of care —— care
coordination.
1. Care coordinators shall provide care coordination,
including administrative tracking and medical recordkeeping
services, to members.
2. a. Care coordinators may employ or utilize the services
of other individuals or entities to assist in providing care
coordination for a member, consistent with rules adopted by the
board and consistent with the statutory requirements for care
coordinator licensure.
b. Care coordinators shall give preference, when employing
or utilizing the services of other individuals, to those
individuals who have transitioned out of employment due to
displacement resulting from implementation of the healthy Iowa
program.
3. Care coordinators shall comply with all federal and
state privacy laws, including but not limited to the federal
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996, Pub. L. No. 104-191, 42 U.S.C. §1320d et seq. and its
implementing regulations, and the disclosure of mental health
and psychological information requirements of chapter 228.
4. A referral from a care coordinator is not required for a
member to receive health care services from any participating
health care provider.
5. A care coordinator may be an individual or entity
approved by the board that is any of the following:
a. A health care provider that is any of the following:
(1) The member’s primary care provider.
(2) The member’s provider of primary gynecological care.
(3) At the option of a member who has a chronic condition
that requires specialty care, a specialist health care provider
who regularly and continually provides treatment to the member
for that condition.
b. An entity licensed as any of the following:
(1) A hospital licensed pursuant to chapter 135B.
(2) A limited service organization established under the
requirements of section 514B.33.
(3) An outpatient surgical facility, as defined in section
135.61, certified as an ambulatory surgical center under the
federal Medicare program or under the Medicaid program.
(4) An organized outpatient health facility as defined in
section 135.61.
(5) A licensed subacute care facility for persons with
serious and persistent mental illness as defined in section
135G.1.
(6) A licensed psychiatric medical institution for children
as defined in section 135H.1.
(7) A entity certified by the department of human services
to provide home and community-based services, including
habilitation services, the program of all-inclusive care for
the elderly, home health services, private duty nursing and
personal care programs, or targeted case management.
(8) A medical care ambulance service or nontransport
service that has received authorization from the department
pursuant to section 147A.5.
(9) A health maintenance organization as defined in section
514B.1.
(10) A licensed nursing facility as defined in section
135C.1.
(11) A licensed nursing home as defined in section 155.1.
(12) A licensed residential care facility as defined in
section 135C.1.
(13) A licensed intermediate care facility for persons with
an intellectual disability as defined in section 135C.1.
(14) A licensed intermediate care facility for persons with
mental illness as defined in section 135C.1.
(15) A licensed health care facility that provides adult day
services as defined in section 135C.1.
(16) A licensed health care facility that provides
rehabilitative services as defined in section 135C.1.
(17) A facility that provides hospice care under a licensed
hospice program as defined in section 135J.1.
(18) A licensed boarding home as defined in section 135O.1.
(19) A certified assisted living program as defined in
section 231C.2.
(20) A designated community mental health center as defined
in section 230A.102.
(21) A certified elder group home as defined in section
231B.1.
c. (1) A Taft-Hartley health and welfare fund, with respect
to its members and their family members.
(2) This provision does not preclude a Taft-Hartley health
and welfare fund from becoming a care coordinator under
paragraph “d”.
d. Any not-for-profit or governmental entity approved by the
healthy Iowa board.
6. a. (1) A healthy Iowa program member shall enroll with
a healthy Iowa care coordinator prior to receiving health care
services.
(2) A member shall enroll with a care coordinator within
sixty days of enrollment in the healthy Iowa program.
(3) The healthy Iowa program shall only reimburse a health
care provider for services if the member is enrolled with a
care coordinator at the time the health care services are
provided.
b. If a member receives health care services before choosing
a care coordinator, the healthy Iowa program shall assist the
member, when appropriate, in choosing a care coordinator.
c. A member shall remain enrolled with a care coordinator
until the member becomes enrolled with a different care
coordinator or ceases to be a member.
d. A member may change the member’s care coordinator based
on rules applicable to selecting a primary medical provider
or a medical home under the Iowa health and wellness program
pursuant to chapter 249N.
7. This section shall not be interpreted to authorize
any individual to engage in any act in violation of the
individual’s professional licensure under title IV.
8. An individual or entity shall not act as a care
coordinator unless the health care services included in care
coordination are within the individual’s professional scope of
practice or within the entity’s legal authority.
9. a. The board shall adopt rules pursuant to chapter
17A regarding and including but not limited to all of the
following:
(1) Procedures and standards for an individual or entity
to be approved as a care coordinator under the healthy Iowa
program.
(2) Procedures and standards relating to the limitation,
suspension, or revocation of an individual’s approval as a care
coordinator based on a determination that the individual or
entity is incompetent to be a care coordinator.
(3) Procedures and standards relating to the limitation,
suspension, or revocation of the approval of an individual’s
or entity’s approval as a care coordinator based on an
exhibited course of conduct that is inconsistent with healthy
Iowa program standards and regulations or that exhibits an
unwillingness to meet those standards and regulations.
(4) Procedures and standards relating to the limitation,
suspension, or revocation of approval of an individual or
entity as a care coordinator based on a determination that the
individual or entity is a potential threat to the public health
or safety.
b. The rules adopted by the board under this subsection
shall be consistent with professional practice, licensure
standards, and regulations established pursuant to title IV,
title VI, and title XIII, as applicable.
c. In developing and implementing rules or standards for
the approval of care coordinators for individuals receiving
chronic mental health care services, the board shall consult
with the division of mental health and disability services of
the department of human services.
10. To maintain approval under the program, a care
coordinator shall do all of the following:
a. Renew the person’s status as a care coordinator every
three years pursuant to rules adopted by the board.
b. Provide the healthy Iowa program any data required by the
department of human services or the department of public health
and as required by the board that would enable the board to
evaluate the impact of care coordinators on quality, outcomes,
and cost of health care.
11. This chapter shall not be construed to alter the
professional practice of health care providers or their
licensure standards established pursuant to title IV.
12. a. Care coordinators shall not use health information
technology or clinical practice guidelines that limit the
effective exercise of the professional judgment of physicians
and registered nurses.
b. Physicians and registered nurses may override health
information technology and clinical practice guidelines if all
of the following criteria are met:
(1) It is consistent with the treating physician’s
determination of medical necessity.
(2) In the professional judgment of the treating physician
or registered nurse, it is in the best interest of the patient
and consistent with the patient’s wishes.
Sec. 17. NEW SECTION. 135E.17 Rates and payment
methodologies.
1. a. The board shall adopt rules pursuant to chapter 17A
regarding contracting and establishing payment methodologies
for covered health care services and care coordination provided
to members under the healthy Iowa program by participating
providers and care coordinators.
b. The board may adopt a variety of payment methodologies,
including those established on a demonstration basis.
c. All payment rates under the healthy Iowa program shall be
reasonable and reasonably related to the cost of efficiently
providing the health care service and ensuring an adequate and
accessible supply of health care services.
2. a. Health care services provided to members under the
healthy Iowa program, with the exception of care coordination,
shall be paid for on a fee-for-service basis unless and until
the board establishes another payment methodology.
b. A rebuttable presumption exists that the Medicare rate of
reimbursement constitutes a reasonable fee-for-service payment
rate.
3. Notwithstanding subsection 2, health maintenance
organizations, essential community providers, and group
medical practices that provide comprehensive, coordinated
services shall be reimbursed on the basis of a capitated system
operating budget or a noncapitated system operating budget.
4. a. Payment for health care services established under
this chapter shall be considered payment in full.
b. A participating health care provider shall not charge any
rate in excess of the payment established under this chapter
for any health care service provided to a member and shall not
solicit or accept payment from any member or third party for
any health care service, except as provided under federal law.
c. This section does not preclude the healthy Iowa program
from acting as a primary or secondary payer in conjunction with
another third-party payer when permitted by federal law.
5. a. The board may adopt rules pursuant to chapter
17A to provide payment methodologies for the payment of
capital-related expenses for specifically identified capital
expenditures incurred by not-for-profit or governmental
entities that are health care entities licensed under title IV,
including but not limited to hospitals, health care facilities,
subacute mental health care facilities, psychiatric medical
institutions for children, entities providing licensed hospice
programs, and entities providing emergency medical care.
b. Any capital-related expense generated by a capital
expenditure that requires prior approval by the board shall not
be paid unless such prior approval has been received.
c. Approval of a capital expenditure shall be based on
achievement of the program standards described in section
135E.19.
6. Payment methodologies and rates shall include a distinct
component of reimbursement for direct and indirect graduate
medical education.
7. a. The board shall adopt rules pursuant to chapter
17A regarding payment methodologies and procedures to pay for
health care services provided to a member while the member is
located outside this state for a period of time not to exceed
ninety days except as provided in paragraph “b”.
b. (1) The board may adopt rules pursuant to chapter 17A
regarding payment methodologies and procedures to pay for
health care services provided to a member while the member is
outside this state for a period of time not to exceed ninety
days if it is medically necessary as determined by the member’s
treating physician in accordance with the program standards
established in section 135E.19 and by the board.
(2) A member’s treating physician is a person licensed to
engage in the practice of medicine and surgery or osteopathic
medicine and surgery pursuant to chapter 148.
Sec. 18. NEW SECTION. 135E.18 Rate negotiations.
1. The healthy Iowa program shall engage in good-faith
negotiations with health care provider representatives under
chapter 135F to develop all of the following:
a. Rates of payment for health care services.
b. Rates of payment for prescription and nonprescription
drugs.
c. Payment methodologies.
2. Rate negotiations shall be conducted annually through a
single entity on behalf of the entire program for prescription
and nonprescription drugs.
3. a. The board shall establish a prescription drug
formulary system, which shall discourage the use of
ineffective, dangerous, or excessively costly medications when
better alternatives are available.
b. The formulary established under this subsection shall
promote the use of generic medications to the greatest extent
possible.
c. Clinicians and patients may petition the board to add
new pharmaceuticals or to remove ineffective or dangerous
medications from the formulary.
d. The board shall adopt rules pursuant to chapter 17A
regarding the use of off-formulary medications which allow for
patient access but do not compromise the formulary.
Sec. 19. NEW SECTION. 135E.19 Program standards.
1. The healthy Iowa program shall establish a single
standard of safe, therapeutic health care services for all
residents.
2. The board shall adopt rules pursuant to chapter 17A to
establish requirements and standards for the program and for
care coordinators and health care providers, consistent with
this chapter and consistent with the applicable professional
practice and licensure standards for health care providers,
health care facilities, and health care professionals
established in title IV, title VI, and title XIII, as
applicable. The rules adopted under this subsection shall
address all of the following:
a. Requirements and standards for the scope, quality, and
accessibility of health care services.
b. Requirements and standards for interactions between
health care providers and members.
c. Requirements and standards for interactions between care
coordinators and health care providers, including credentialing
and participation in health care organization networks, and
terms, methods, and rates of payment.
3. The board shall adopt rules pursuant to chapter 17A to
establish requirements and standards to promote all of the
following:
a. Simplification, transparency, uniformity, and fairness in
health care provider credentialing and participation in health
care organization networks, referrals, payment procedures and
rates, claims processing, and approval of health care services,
as applicable.
b. In-person primary and preventive care, care coordination,
efficient and effective health care services, quality
assurance, and promotion of public, environmental, and
occupational health.
c. Elimination of health care disparities, including
geographic disparities, racial disparities, income-based
disparities, gender-based disparities, sex-based disparities,
and other disparities.
d. Nondiscrimination with respect to members and health
care providers on the basis of age, citizenship, claims
experience, color, creed, familial status, gender identity,
genetic information, geography, health status, immigration
status, marital status, medical condition, medical history,
mental disability, military or veteran status, national origin,
physical disability, primary language, race, receipt of health
care, religion, sex, sexual orientation, or source of income.
e. Provision of health care services under the healthy
Iowa program that is appropriate to the patient’s clinically
relevant circumstances.
f. Accessibility of care coordination and health care
services, including accessibility for people with disabilities
and people with limited ability to speak or understand English.
g. Providing care coordination and health care services in
a culturally competent manner.
4. The board shall adopt rules pursuant to chapter 17A to
establish requirements and standards, to the extent authorized
by federal law, for replacing and merging with the healthy
Iowa program any health care services and ancillary services
currently provided by other programs, including but not limited
to Medicare, the Affordable Care Act, and federally matched
public health programs.
5. a. Any participating health care provider or care
coordinator that is organized as a for-profit entity shall meet
the same requirements and standards as entities organized as
not-for-profit entities.
b. Payments under the program to for-profit entities shall
not be calculated to accommodate the generation of profit,
excess revenue, revenue for dividends, or other return on
investment or the payment of taxes that would not be paid by a
not-for-profit entity.
6. a. A participating health care provider shall do all of
the following:
(1) Furnish information as required by the department of
public health, including the public health data management
program.
(2) Permit examination of information by the healthy Iowa
program as may be reasonably required for purposes of reviewing
accessibility and utilization of health care services, quality
assurance, cost containment, the making of payments, and
statistical or other studies of the operation of the healthy
Iowa program or for protection and promotion of public,
environmental, and occupational health.
b. The board shall use data collected under this subsection
to ensure that clinical practices meet the utilization,
quality, and access standards of the healthy Iowa program.
7. In developing requirements and standards and making
other policy determinations under this chapter, the board
shall consult with representatives of members, health care
providers, care coordinators, health care organizations, labor
organizations representing health care provider employees, and
other interested parties.
Sec. 20. NEW SECTION. 135E.20 Advocacy for necessary health
care.
1. As part of a health care provider’s duty to exercise
a professional standard of care when evaluating a patient’s
medical condition, a participating health care provider under
the healthy Iowa program shall do all of the following:
a. Advocate for medically necessary health care services for
the provider’s patients.
b. Act in the exclusive interest of patients.
2. Consistent with subsection 1 and with professional
standards of care under title IV, a patient’s treating
physician or health care provider is responsible for the
determination of the health care services medically necessary
for the patient.
3. Consistent with subsection 1 and with professional
standards of care under title IV, title VI, and title XIII,
care coordinators and health care providers shall use
reasonable care and diligence in safeguarding their patients
and shall not impair any health care provider’s duty to
advocate for medically appropriate health care services for
patients.
4. Consistent with subsection 1 and with professional
standards of care under title IV, title VI, and title XIII, any
pecuniary interest or relationship of a physician or health
care provider, including any interest or relationship disclosed
or reported under this section, that impairs the physician’s or
health care provider’s ability to provide medically necessary
health care services to a patient violates the physician’s or
health care provider’s duty to advocate for medically necessary
health care services for patients.
5. A health care provider violates the duty to provide
medically necessary care services under this section if the
health care provider accepts any bonus, incentive payment, or
compensation based on any of the following:
a. A patient’s utilization of health care services.
b. The financial results of any other health care provider
or care coordinator with which the health care provider or
care coordinator has a pecuniary interest or contractual
relationship, including employment or other compensation-based
relationship.
c. The financial results of any health maintenance
organization, essential community providers, or group medical
practices that receives capitated payments from the healthy
Iowa program.
6. To evaluate and review compliance by participating
health care providers and care coordinators under the healthy
Iowa program, participating health care providers and care
coordinators shall report, at least annually, to the department
of public health’s public health data management program all
of the following:
a. Any beneficial interest in or compensation arrangement
with an entity to which the participating health care provider
referred a patient.
b. Any membership, proprietary interest, or co-ownership in
any form in or with a clinical or bioanalytical laboratory.
c. Any payments to a clinical or bioanalytical laboratory
for a test or test series for a patient.
d. Any profit-sharing arrangement with a clinical or
bioanalytical laboratory.
e. Any contracts or subcontracts entered into that contain
incentive plans, involve general payments such as capitation
payments or shared risk agreements, and are not tied to
specific medical decisions involving specific members or groups
of members with similar medical conditions. Such contracts
and subcontracts include those entered into with a health
maintenance organization or group practice.
f. Any bonus, incentive agreements, or compensation
arrangements with any other participating health care provider,
care coordinator, health maintenance organization, or group
medical practice under the healthy Iowa program.
g. Any offer, delivery, receipt, or acceptance of rebates,
refunds, commission, preference, patronage dividend, discount,
or other consideration for a referral made when treating a
member of a health maintenance organization, to another health
care provider in the same group practice as the referring
health care provider, or made for in-office ancillary services
or tests that are furnished by the referring health care
provider, a person in the same group practice as the referring
health care provider, or an individual employed or supervised
by the referring health care provider.
h. Any other referral or relationship that the board finds
necessary to disclose to meet the purposes of this section.
7. The board may adopt rules pursuant to chapter 17A as
necessary to implement and enforce this section and may adopt
such rules to expand reporting requirements under this section.
Sec. 21. NEW SECTION. 135E.21 Federal waivers.
1. The board shall seek all federal waivers and other
federal approvals and arrangements and submit federal state
plan amendments as necessary to operate the healthy Iowa
program consistent with this chapter.
2. a. The board and, as appropriate, the director of human
services, shall apply to the United States secretary of health
and human services or other appropriate federal official for
all waivers of requirements, and make other arrangements under
Medicare, any federally matched public health program, the
Affordable Care Act, and any other federal programs pertaining
to the provision of health care that provide federal funds for
payment for health care services that are necessary to:
(1) Enable all members to receive all benefits through the
healthy Iowa program.
(2) Enable the state to implement this chapter.
(3) Allow the state to receive and deposit all federal
payments under those programs, including funds that may
be provided in lieu of premium tax credits, cost-sharing
subsidies, and small business tax credits, in the state
treasury to the credit of the healthy Iowa trust fund.
(4) Use moneys deposited in the healthy Iowa trust fund
for the healthy Iowa program and other provisions under this
chapter.
b. To the greatest extent possible, the board shall
negotiate arrangements with the federal government to ensure
that federal payments are paid to the healthy Iowa program in
place of federal funding of, or tax benefits for, federally
matched public health programs or federal health programs.
c. (1) The board may require members or applicants to
provide information necessary for the healthy Iowa program to
comply with any waiver or arrangement under this chapter.
(2) Information provided by members to the board for the
purposes of this paragraph shall not be used for any other
purpose.
d. The board may take any additional actions necessary to
effectively implement the healthy Iowa program to the maximum
extent possible as a single-payer program consistent with this
chapter.
3. a. The board may take actions consistent with this
chapter to enable the healthy Iowa program to administer
Medicare in this state.
b. The healthy Iowa program shall do all of the following:
(1) Be a provider of Medicare part B supplemental insurance
coverage.
(2) Provide premium assistance drug coverage under Medicare
part D for eligible members of the healthy Iowa program.
4. The board may waive or modify the applicability of any
provisions of this section relating to any federally matched
public health program or Medicare, as necessary, to do any of
the following:
a. Implement any waiver arrangement under this section.
b. Maximize the federal benefits to the healthy Iowa program
under this section.
5. a. The board may apply for coverage for, and enroll,
any eligible member under any federally matched public health
program or Medicare.
b. Enrollment in a federally matched public health program
or Medicare shall not cause any member to lose any health care
services provided by the healthy Iowa program or diminish any
right the member would otherwise have.
6. The board shall take necessary action to incorporate
health care coverage of residents who are employed in another
state into waivers and other approvals applied for or obtained
under this section.
7. a. The board shall take necessary action to reduce or
eliminate a member’s coinsurance, cost-sharing, or premium
obligations or to increase the likelihood of an individual’s
eligibility for any federal financial support related to
Medicare or the Affordable Care Act.
b. The board may act under paragraph “a” only upon a
finding approved by the board that the action does all of the
following:
(1) Helps to increase the number of members who are eligible
for and enrolled in federally matched public health programs,
or for any program to reduce or eliminate an individual’s
coinsurance, cost-sharing, or premium obligations or increase
an individual’s eligibility for any federal financial support
related to Medicare or the Affordable Care Act.
(2) Does not diminish any individual’s access to any health
care service or right the individual would otherwise have.
(3) Is in the interest of the healthy Iowa program.
(4) Does not require or has received any necessary federal
waivers or approvals to ensure federal financial participation.
c. Action that the board may take under paragraph “a” may
include any of the following:
(1) An increase to the income eligibility level related to
Medicare or the Affordable Care Act.
(2) An increase to resource retention or an elimination of
the resource test for eligibility related to Medicare or the
Affordable Care Act.
(3) Simplification of any procedural or documentation
requirement for enrollment related to Medicare or the
Affordable Care Act.
(4) An increase in the benefits for any federally matched
public health program and for any program in order to reduce or
eliminate an individual’s coinsurance, cost-sharing, or premium
obligations or increase an individual’s eligibility for any
federal financial support related to Medicare or the Affordable
Care Act.
d. Board actions under this subsection shall not apply to
eligibility for payment for long-term care.
8. To enable the board to apply for coverage for, and
enroll, any eligible member under any federally matched public
health program or Medicare, the board may require that all
members or applicants provide the information necessary to
enable the board to determine whether the applicant is eligible
for a federally matched public health program or for Medicare,
or any program or benefit under Medicare.
9. As a condition of continued eligibility for health
care services under the healthy Iowa program, a member who is
eligible for benefits under Medicare shall enroll in Medicare,
including parts A, B, and D.
10. a. The healthy Iowa program shall provide premium
assistance for all members enrolling in a Medicare part D drug
coverage plan under §1860D of Tit. XVIII of the federal Social
Security Act, 42 U.S.C. §1395w-101 et seq.
b. Premium assistance required under paragraph “a” is
limited to the low-income benchmark premium amount established
by the centers for Medicare and Medicaid services of the United
States department of health and human services and any other
amount the federal agency establishes under its de minimis
premium policy, except that those payments made on behalf of
members enrolled in a Medicare advantage plan may exceed the
low-income benchmark premium amount if determined to be cost
effective to the healthy Iowa program.
11. a. If the board has reasonable grounds to believe that
a member may be eligible for an income-related subsidy under
§1860D-14 of Tit. XVIII of the federal Social Security Act, 42
U.S.C. §1395w-114, the member shall be required to provide and
authorize the healthy Iowa program to obtain any information or
documentation required to establish the member’s eligibility
for that subsidy.
b. The board shall attempt to obtain as much of the
information and documentation required by paragraph “a” as
possible.
12. a. The healthy Iowa program shall make a reasonable
effort to notify members of their obligations under this
section.
b. After a reasonable effort has been made to contact the
member, the member shall be notified in writing that the member
has sixty days to provide the required information.
c. If the required information is not provided within the
sixty-day period, the member’s coverage under the healthy Iowa
program may be terminated.
d. Information provided by members to the board for the
purposes of this section shall not be used for any other
purpose.
13. The board shall assume responsibility for all benefits
and health care services paid for by the federal government
with those funds.
Sec. 22. NEW SECTION. 135E.22 Healthy Iowa trust fund ——
special fund created.
1. A special fund is created in the state treasury, separate
and apart from all other public moneys or funds of this state,
to be known as the healthy Iowa trust fund. The fund shall
consist of all of the following:
a. All moneys appropriated by the state to the fund.
b. All moneys received from the federal government, as
the result of any waiver of requirements granted or other
arrangements agreed to by the federal government for health
care programs.
c. All moneys transferred to the fund attributable to state
and federal financial participation in Medicaid, the healthy
and well kids in Iowa program, and Medicare.
d. All receipts and revenue after January 1, 2018, as a
result of the collection of taxes or other moneys, as provided
by law, shall also be deposited in the healthy Iowa trust fund.
e. All federal and state moneys received for purposes of the
provision of services authorized under Tit. XX of the federal
Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. §1397 et seq., but are provided
under the healthy Iowa program.
f. All moneys received from other federal programs that
provide moneys for the payment of health care services that are
provided under this chapter.
g. All moneys paid by the state that are equivalent to those
amounts that are paid on behalf of residents under Medicare,
any federally matched public health program, or the Affordable
Care Act for health benefits that are equivalent to health
benefits covered under the healthy Iowa program.
2. All moneys in the fund shall be deposited, administered,
and disbursed, in the same manner and under the same conditions
and requirements as is provided by law for special funds in
the state treasury. The moneys credited to the fund are not
subject to section 8.33 and shall not be transferred, used,
obligated, appropriated, or otherwise encumbered except as
provided in this section. Moneys deposited into the fund are
appropriated and made available to the healthy Iowa program to
be used only for the following purposes established by this
chapter:
a. To implement the purposes of the healthy Iowa program.
b. To be used by the healthy Iowa program for the payment of
claims or reimbursement of member benefits.
c. To be used by the healthy Iowa program for the payment,
in accordance with any agreement with the federal government,
of amounts required to obtain federal waivers and such other
purposes under the healthy Iowa program as may be authorized
by law.
3. The treasurer of state is the custodian and trustee of
the fund and shall administer the fund in accordance with the
purposes of the healthy Iowa program. It is the duty of the
treasurer of state to do all of the following:
a. To hold the trust funds.
b. To disburse the trust funds upon warrants drawn by the
director of the healthy Iowa program.
4. The healthy Iowa program shall administer the healthy
Iowa trust fund and shall also administer all other provisions
of this section.
5. All moneys in the fund, except moneys received
pursuant to federal waivers entered into pursuant to section
135E.21, which are received from the federal government
shall be expended solely for the purposes and in the amounts
found necessary by the board for the proper and efficient
administration of this chapter and any federal waivers or
agreements.
6. Moneys deposited in the fund shall not be loaned to, or
borrowed by, any other special fund or the general fund of the
state, or a county general fund or any other county fund.
7. The board shall establish and maintain a reserve fund in
the healthy Iowa trust fund.
8. The board or staff of the board shall not utilize any
moneys intended for the administrative and operational expenses
of the board for staff retreats, promotional giveaways,
excessive executive compensation, or promotion of federal or
state legislative or regulatory modifications.
9. a. A healthy Iowa federal funds account is created
within the fund.
b. All federal moneys received shall be placed into the
healthy Iowa federal funds account.
Sec. 23. NEW SECTION. 135E.23 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or its application to any
person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect other provisions or application of this chapter
which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
severable.
Sec. 24. NEW SECTION. 135E.24 Relation to other laws.
This chapter does not preempt or prevail over and is
not meant to be construed to preempt or prevail over any
ordinances, resolutions, or other actions of a local government
or rules or actions of a state agency that are consistent with
this chapter or that provide more protections and benefits to
residents of this state than this chapter or are more stringent
than this chapter.
Sec. 25. NEW SECTION. 135F.1 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise
requires:
1. a. “Health care provider” means a person who meets all
of the following criteria:
(1) Is licensed, certified, registered, or authorized to
practice a health care profession in the state pursuant to
chapter 147A, 148, 148A, 148B, 148C, 148E, 148F, 148G, 149,
151, 152, 152A, 152B, 152C, 153, 154, 154A, 154B, 154C, 154D,
154F, 155, or 155A.
(2) Is an approved health care provider under the healthy
Iowa program created in chapter 135E.
(3) Is an individual who does any of the following:
(a) Practices the profession in which that person is
licensed, certified, registered, or authorized to practice
in the state as a health care provider or as an independent
contractor.
(b) Is an owner, officer, shareholder, or proprietor of a
health care provider.
(c) Is an entity that employs or utilizes health care
providers to provide health care services under the healthy
Iowa program.
b. “Health care provider” does not include an individual who
practices as an employee of another health care provider.
2. “Health care provider representative” means a third party
that is authorized by a health care provider to negotiate
on behalf of the health care provider with the healthy Iowa
program over terms and conditions of participation affecting
those health care providers.
Sec. 26. NEW SECTION. 135F.2 Collective negotiation
authorized.
1. Health care providers may meet and communicate for the
purpose of collectively negotiating with the healthy Iowa
program on any matter relating to the healthy Iowa program
including but not limited to rates of payment for health care
services, rates of payment for prescription and nonprescription
drugs, and payment methodologies.
2. This chapter shall not be construed, is not intended to
be construed, and shall not imply any of the following:
a. To allow or authorize an alteration of the terms of the
internal and external review procedures set forth in law.
b. To allow a strike by health care providers related to the
collective negotiations under the healthy Iowa program.
c. To allow or authorize terms or conditions of
participation that would impede the ability of the healthy
Iowa program to obtain or retain accreditation by the national
committee for quality assurance or a similar body, or to comply
with applicable state or federal law.
Sec. 27. NEW SECTION. 135F.3 Collective negotiation ——
requirements.
1. A health care provider representative is the only party
authorized to negotiate with the healthy Iowa program on behalf
of the health care providers as a group.
2. A health care provider shall be bound by the terms
and conditions negotiated by the health care provider
representative.
3. Health care providers have the right during collective
negotiations under this chapter to communicate with other
health care providers regarding the terms and conditions of
participation to be negotiated with the healthy Iowa program
and to communicate with health care provider representatives.
4. The healthy Iowa program may communicate or negotiate
with the health care provider representative, and may offer
and provide different terms and conditions of participation to
individual competing health care providers.
5. This section shall not be construed, is not intended to
be construed to, and shall not imply any of the following:
a. An effect on or limitation to the right of a health care
provider or group of health care providers to collectively
petition a governmental entity for a change in a law, rule, or
regulation.
b. An effect on or limitation to collective bargaining
on the part of a health care provider with the health care
provider’s employer or any other lawful collective bargaining.
6. Before engaging in collective negotiations with the
healthy Iowa program on behalf of health care providers, a
health care provider representative shall file with the board,
in the manner prescribed by the board, all of the following
information:
a. The name of the representative.
b. The representative’s plan of operation.
c. The representative’s procedures to ensure compliance with
this chapter.
7. a. A person who acts as the representative of
negotiating parties under this chapter shall pay a fee to the
board to act as a representative.
b. The board shall set fees in amounts deemed reasonable
and necessary to cover the costs incurred by the board in
administering this chapter.
Sec. 28. NEW SECTION. 135F.4 Health care providers ——
prohibited collective action.
1. This chapter shall not authorize competing health care
providers to act in concert in response to discussions or
negotiations of a health care provider representative with the
healthy Iowa program, except as authorized by other law.
2. A health care provider representative shall not
negotiate any agreement that excludes, limits the participation
or reimbursement of, or otherwise limits the scope of health
care services to be provided by any health care provider or
group of health care providers with respect to the performance
of health care services that are within the health care
provider’s scope of practice, license, registration, or
certification.
Sec. 29. NEW SECTION. 135F.5 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or its application to any
person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect other provisions or application of this chapter
which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
severable.
Sec. 30. NEW SECTION. 135F.6 Relation to other laws.
This chapter does not preempt or prevail over and is
not meant to be construed to preempt or prevail over any
ordinances, resolutions, or other actions of a local government
or rules or actions of a state agency that are consistent with
this chapter or that provide more protections and benefits to
Iowa residents than this chapter or are more stringent than
this chapter.
Sec. 31. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Act, being deemed of
immediate importance, takes effect upon enactment.
Sec. 32. CONTINGENT IMPLEMENTATION. Implementation of this
Act is contingent upon sufficient revenue in the healthy Iowa
trust fund to bear the costs of implementing the healthy Iowa
program, as determined by the director of human services. The
director of human services shall notify the secretary of the
senate, the chief clerk of the house of representatives, and
the Iowa Code editor, in writing when the healthy Iowa trust
fund has sufficient revenue to bear the costs of implementing
this Act. The department of human services shall publish a
copy of the notice on its internet site.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
This bill creates new Code chapter 135E, establishing the
healthy Iowa program, which provides comprehensive, universal
single-payer health care coverage and a health care cost
control system for all residents of Iowa. The bill provides
that all residents of the state are eligible to be members of
the healthy Iowa program and are eligible to receive health
care services benefits under the program. The bill requires
that the healthy Iowa program provide all members of the
program with certain health care services, and incorporate the
health care benefits and standards of other existing federal
and state programs. The bill prohibits health care providers
participating in the healthy Iowa program from refusing to
provide services to a member on the basis of certain protected
categories. The bill establishes the healthy Iowa board and
public advisory committee.
The bill provides that health care coverage under the
healthy Iowa program shall not be subject to coinsurance,
deductibles, or copayments. The bill prohibits certain
insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health
maintenance organizations from offering benefits that duplicate
the services covered by the program. The bill prohibits health
insurers from offering health benefits covering any health care
service for which coverage is offered to individuals under
the healthy Iowa program, except as otherwise provided, and
prohibits a participating health care provider from imposing
charges directly on healthy Iowa members.
The bill provides for approval of participating health
care providers and care coordinators under the program and
provides for enrollment of residents in the program. The bill
also provides that healthy Iowa program members may choose a
participating health care provider and requires that members
select a care coordinator.
The bill specifies healthy Iowa program standards and
payment for health care services and care coordination, and
requires that the program provide reimbursements to certain
members. The bill establishes a health benefit credit for
certain employers and residents.
The bill establishes the healthy Iowa trust fund as a special
fund for the purpose of implementing the program and its
purposes. The bill requires the board and the department of
human services to apply to the federal government for waivers
and other approvals relating to federally regulated health care
programs.
The bill also creates new chapter 135F providing for
collective negotiations between health care providers and
the healthy Iowa program. The bill authorizes health care
providers to collectively negotiate with the program for
rates of payment for health care services, rates of payment
for prescription and nonprescription drugs, and payment
methodologies using a third-party representative.
Implementation of the bill is contingent upon sufficient
revenue in the healthy Iowa trust fund to bear the costs of
implementing the healthy Iowa program as determined by the
director of human services.