An Act relating to health insurance coverage for mammograms and
including effective date and applicability provisions.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. Section 514C.4, Code 2018, is amended to read as
follows:
514C.4 Mandated coverage for mammography.
1. As used in this section:
a. “Health care professional” means a health care
practitioner licensed, accredited, registered, or certified
consistent with state law to recommend the performance of a
mammogram.
b. “Mammogram” means a radiographic image obtained using a
procedure, including two-dimensional mammography or three-
dimensional mammography, as recommended by a woman’s health
care professional.
1. 2. a. A policy or contract providing for third-party
payment or prepayment of health or medical expenses shall
provide minimum mammography examination coverage, including,
but not limited to, the following classes of third-party
payment provider contracts or policies delivered, issued for
delivery, continued, or renewed in this state.
(1) Individual or group accident and sickness insurance
providing coverage on an expense-incurred basis.
(2) An individual or group hospital or medical service
contract issued pursuant to chapter 509, 514, or 514A.
(3) An individual or group health maintenance organization
contract regulated under chapter 514B.
(4) An individual or group Medicare supplemental policy,
unless coverage pursuant to such policy is preempted by federal
law.
b. A long-term care policy or contract is specifically
excluded from regulation under this section.
2. 3. As used in this section, “minimum mammography
examination coverage” means benefits which are better than or
equal to the following minimum requirements:
a. One baseline mammogram for any woman who is thirty-five
through thirty-nine years of age, or more frequent mammograms
if recommended by the woman’s physician health care
professional.
b. A mammogram every two years for any woman who is
forty through forty-nine years of age, or more frequently if
recommended by the woman’s physician.
c. b. A mammogram every year for any woman who is fifty
forty years of age or older, or more frequently if recommended
by the woman’s physician health care professional.
3. 4. Mammogram benefits may be subject to any policy or
contract provisions which apply generally to other services
covered by the policy or contract.
4. 5. The commissioner of insurance shall adopt rules under
chapter 17A necessary to implement this section.
Sec. 2. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Act, being deemed of immediate
importance, takes effect upon enactment.
Sec. 3. APPLICABILITY. This Act applies to the classes of
third-party payment provider contracts or policies specified
in section 514C.4, as amended by this Act, that are delivered,
issued for delivery, continued, or renewed in this state on or
after July 1, 2018.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
This bill relates to insurance coverage for a mammogram as
recommended by a woman’s health care professional.
The bill defines “mammogram” as a radiographic image
obtained using a procedure, including two-dimensional
mammography or three-dimensional mammography, as recommended
by a woman’s health care professional. Currently, insurance
coverage is required for one mammogram every two years for
women age 40 through 49. The bill changes this to require
insurance coverage for an annual mammogram for women age 40 and
over. The bill requires that the insurance coverage apply to
two-dimensional mammograms and three-dimensional mammograms.
The bill also allows a woman’s health care professional,
defined to include licensed, accredited, registered, or
certified health care practitioners, to recommend a mammogram.
Currently, a woman’s physician must recommend the performance
of a mammogram.
The bill applies to the classes of third-party payment
provider contracts or policies specified in Code section 514C.4
that are delivered, issued for delivery, continued, or renewed
in this state on or after July 1, 2018.