An Act providing for a county groundwater pollution control
program, and providing for penalties.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. Section 455B.171, Code 2017, is amended by adding
the following new subsections:
NEW SUBSECTION. 1A. “Agricultural drainage well area” means
the same as defined in section 460.101.
NEW SUBSECTION. 8A. “Groundwater” means the same as defined
in section 455E.2.
NEW SUBSECTION. 10A. “Karst terrain” means the same as
defined in section 459.102.
NEW SUBSECTION. 29A. “Sensitive groundwater access area”
means karst terrain or a location that drains into a known
sinkhole.
Sec. 2. NEW SECTION. 455B.201 Definitions.
As used in this subpart, unless the context otherwise
requires:
1. “Board” means a county board of supervisors.
2. “County groundwater pollution control program” or
“program” means the program conducted by a county board of
supervisors as provided in this subpart.
3. “State groundwater protection regulations” means the
provisions of state law described in section 455B.202.
Sec. 3. NEW SECTION. 455B.202 Authorization.
1. A county board of supervisors that has been issued a
certificate of acceptance by the department pursuant to section
455B.203 may conduct a county groundwater pollution control
program.
2. If the department issues a certificate of acceptance to
a county board of supervisors pursuant to section 455B.203,
the department cedes its powers and duties to the county board
of supervisors to administer and enforce state groundwater
protection regulations that apply to sources that are located
in sensitive groundwater access areas in the county. The scope
of such state groundwater protection regulations is limited
to the provisions of division I and this division, including
rules adopted by the department pursuant to such divisions;
the provisions of chapter 459, subchapter III, including rules
adopted by the department pursuant to that subchapter; chapter
459A, including rules adopted by the department pursuant to
that chapter; chapter 459B, including rules adopted by the
department pursuant to that chapter; and chapter 460, including
rules adopted by the department pursuant to that chapter.
Sec. 4. NEW SECTION. 455B.203 Certificate of acceptance ——
request and approval.
1. In order to conduct a county groundwater pollution
control program, a county board of supervisors must make
a request to the department. The request shall include
a resolution adopted by the board and any supporting
documentation required by the department relating to the
board’s implementation and administration of the program.
2. The department shall approve or disapprove a request
submitted by a county board of supervisors based on a
determination of whether the board is capable of conducting the
program in lieu of the department administering and enforcing
state groundwater protection regulations as provided in section
455B.202.
3. In evaluating a request submitted by a county board of
supervisors under this section, the department shall consider
all of the following:
a. The types of ordinances, rules, or standards that the
board plans to adopt in order to conduct the program. The
ordinances, rules, or standards must be consistent with or more
strict than state law.
b. The county’s administrative organization, staff, and
financial or other resources available to effectively conduct
the program.
c. The location of monitoring devices that may provide a
reasonably consistent measurement of groundwater contamination
in compliance with uniform state standards that shall be
adopted by the department.
4. The department may conduct a public hearing before
approving or disapproving a request submitted by a county board
of supervisors under this section.
5. The department shall notify a county board of supervisors
of the department’s decision in regard to a request within one
hundred eighty days of the date that it received the request.
Once the department approves a request, it shall issue a
certificate of acceptance to the board. The department may
limit or qualify the certificate of acceptance as necessary in
order to perform duties reserved by law to the department or
to perform concurrent functions with the board, including the
issuance of permits. The department shall not reduce the scope
of the certificate of acceptance so that it cedes less than the
requested authority to conduct the program. The department
shall continue to administer and enforce the state groundwater
protection regulations within the county that are not ceded to
the county board of supervisors.
Sec. 5. NEW SECTION. 455B.204 Suspension or revocation of
certificate of acceptance.
The department may determine at any time that a county
board of supervisors is not conducting a county groundwater
pollution control program in a manner consistent with its
certificate of acceptance. Upon making the determination,
the department shall notify the county board of supervisors,
citing all inconsistencies and corrective measures required
to be completed by the board within a reasonable amount of
time. If the board does not implement corrective measures
within the reasonable amount of time, the department shall
suspend or revoke the certificate of acceptance. The
department's suspension may reduce the scope of the certificate
of acceptance so that it cedes less authority to conduct the
program to the board. Upon receipt of evidence that the board
has taken corrective action, the department may reinstate a
suspended certificate of acceptance with or without limitation,
and the board shall resume conducting the county groundwater
pollution control program as provided by the reinstated
certificate of acceptance. The department shall temporarily
administer and enforce the state groundwater protection
regulations until the matter is concluded.
Sec. 6. NEW SECTION. 455B.205 Contest of departmental
action.
A board of supervisors may contest a decision by the
department as provided in this subpart. The board shall
contest the decision as a contested case proceeding conducted
by the department of inspections and appeals pursuant to
chapter 17A. The burden of proof shall be on the board.
Sec. 7. NEW SECTION. 455B.206 Attorney general.
The department’s issuance of a certificate of acceptance
pursuant to section 455B.203 does not limit the authority of
the attorney general to enforce state groundwater protection
regulations.
Sec. 8. NEW SECTION. 455B.207 Prosecution —— criminal
penalties.
A county board of supervisors conducting a county
groundwater pollution control program may refer any matter
requiring enforcement of state groundwater protection
regulations that has been ceded to the board to the attorney
general for a civil or criminal action, in the same manner as
the department. The board may also refer the matter to the
county attorney for civil or criminal action. Moneys collected
in fines and civil penalties shall be credited to the state
in the same manner as if the fines or civil penalties were
collected by the attorney general.
Sec. 9. NEW SECTION. 455B.208 Civil penalties.
Notwithstanding sections 331.302 and 331.307, a county
board of supervisors conducting a county groundwater pollution
control program may administratively establish, assess, and
collect civil penalties consistent with state groundwater
protection regulations. Civil penalties shall be credited to
the state in the same manner as civil penalties collected by
the department for the same violation.
Sec. 10. NEW SECTION. 455B.301B County groundwater
pollution control program.
A county board of supervisors issued a certificate of
acceptance to conduct a county groundwater pollution control
program by the department pursuant to division III, part 1, of
this chapter may administer and enforce the provisions of this
division within sensitive groundwater access areas located in
the county.
Sec. 11. NEW SECTION. 459.302A County groundwater pollution
control program.
A county board of supervisors issued a certificate of
acceptance to conduct a county groundwater pollution control
program by the department pursuant to chapter 455B, division
III, part 1, may administer and enforce the provisions of this
subchapter within sensitive groundwater access areas located
in the county.
Sec. 12. NEW SECTION. 459A.106 County groundwater pollution
control program.
A county board of supervisors issued a certificate of
acceptance to conduct a county groundwater pollution control
program by the department pursuant to chapter 455B, division
III, part 1, may administer and enforce the provisions of this
chapter within sensitive groundwater access areas located in
the county.
Sec. 13. NEW SECTION. 459B.105 County groundwater pollution
control program.
A county board of supervisors issued a certificate of
acceptance to conduct a county groundwater pollution control
program by the department pursuant to chapter 455B, division
III, part 1, may administer and enforce the provisions of this
chapter within sensitive groundwater access areas located in
the county.
Sec. 14. NEW SECTION. 460.102 County groundwater pollution
control program.
A county board of supervisors issued a certificate of
acceptance to conduct a county groundwater pollution control
program by the department pursuant to chapter 455B, division
III, part 1, may administer and enforce the provisions of this
chapter within sensitive groundwater access areas located in
the county.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
GENERAL. This bill authorizes the department of natural
resources to cede some of its authority to administer certain
environmental statutes and its rules to a county board of
supervisors upon the board’s request. A board that has been
granted such authority conducts a county groundwater pollution
control program according to the terms of a certificate of
acceptance issued by the department.
CERTIFICATE OF ACCEPTANCE —— ISSUANCE. A certificate of
acceptance allows a county board of supervisors to administer
and enforce state groundwater protection regulations that apply
to sources that are located in sensitive groundwater access
areas (where there is karst terrain, or land where there is
located an agricultural drainage well area, or known sinkhole).
The regulations are limited to those in statute or rule under
Code chapter 455B, division I and division III (providing
general authority and water quality regulations); Code chapter
459, subchapter III, and Code chapters 459, 459A, and 459B
(providing for water quality regulation applicable to animal
feeding operations); and Code chapter 460 (regulating sources
that may contaminate groundwater from agricultural drainage
wells). The department may approve or disapprove a request
but cannot limit or qualify the certificate of acceptance or
reduce the scope of the certificate of acceptance so that it
cedes less authority to conduct the program than requested by
the board. A county board of supervisors may adopt ordinances,
rules, or standards either consistent with or more strict than
state law.
CERTIFICATE OF ACCEPTANCE —— SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
The bill provides that the department may suspend or revoke
a certificate of acceptance if it determines that the
board is not conducting the program in a manner consistent
with the certificate of acceptance. If a certificate is
suspended or revoked, a county may take measures to correct
the inconsistencies and the department may reinstate the
certificate with or without limitation. The board may contest
a departmental decision by bringing a contested case proceeding
to be decided by the department of inspections and appeals.
ENFORCEMENT. The department’s issuance of a certificate
of acceptance does not limit the authority of the attorney
general to enforce state groundwater protection regulations,
and the board may refer any matter requiring enforcement to the
attorney general or a county attorney for judicial enforcement.
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. The bill provides for both
administrative and judicial enforcement of violations of
state groundwater protection regulations. The board may
assess, impose, and collect civil penalties up to $10,000
(Code section 455B.109). The board may also seek judicial
enforcement of civil penalties not to exceed $5,000 per each
day of a violation (Code section 455B.191). A person who fails
to prevent surface water from draining into an agricultural
drainage well is subject to a civil penalty of not more than
$1,000 (Code sections 460.202, 460.203, and 460.206), and a
person who constructs or expands an earthen storage structure
within an agricultural drainage well area is subject to a civil
penalty of not more than $5,000 for each day of the violation
(Code sections 460.205 and 460.206).
Criminal penalties also apply. A person who negligently or
knowingly disposes of a pollutant in a water of the state is
guilty of a serious misdemeanor or an aggravated misdemeanor
depending on the type of violation, punishable by a range of
fines and imprisonment (Code sections 455B.186 and 455B.191).
Moneys assessed as part of an administrative or civil
proceeding are to be credited to the state in the same
manner as if the department had not issued a certificate of
acceptance. Civil penalties assessed by the department must
be deposited in the general fund of the state (Code section
455B.109). Moneys from civil penalties assessed for violations
involving animal feeding operations are to be credited to the
Iowa nutrient research fund created in section 466B.46 (Code
sections 459.602, 459.603, 459A.502, and 459B.402). Moneys
from civil penalties for violations involving contamination of
groundwater from agricultural drainage wells are credited to
the livestock remediation fund (Code section 459.501). Moneys
from criminal fines and restitution awarded to the attorney
general as part of a judgment in an environmental criminal case
are credited to the environmental crimes investigation and
prosecution fund (Code section 455B.112A).