An Act relating to drivers who are hearing impaired, and making
a penalty applicable.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. Section 321.34, Code 2017, is amended by adding
the following new subsection:
NEW SUBSECTION. 14A. Hearing impaired special plates.
a. An owner referred to in subsection 12 may, upon written
application to the department, order special registration
plates with a hearing impaired processed emblem designed by
the department bearing the international symbol of access
for hearing loss. The special registration plates with a
hearing impaired processed emblem shall only be issued if the
application is accompanied by a statement from a physician
licensed under chapter 148 or an audiologist licensed under
chapter 154F, written on the physician’s or audiologist’s
stationery, stating the nature of the applicant’s hearing loss
and such additional information as required by rules adopted
by the department. If the application is approved by the
department, the special registration plates with a hearing
impaired processed emblem shall be issued to the applicant.
There shall be no fee in addition to the regular annual
registration fee for the special registration plates with a
hearing impaired processed emblem. The authorization for
special registration plates with a hearing impaired processed
emblem shall not be renewed without the applicant furnishing
evidence to the department that the owner of the vehicle is
still hearing impaired.
b. When special registration plates with a hearing impaired
processed emblem are issued to an applicant, the department
shall also furnish to the applicant at no cost three stickers
bearing the international symbol of access for hearing loss.
The applicant shall place one sticker in the upper left corner
of the vehicle’s windshield, one sticker in the upper left
corner of the vehicle’s driver’s side window, and one sticker,
which shall be treated with a reflective material according to
specifications adopted by the department, in the upper left
corner of the vehicle’s rear window.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
This bill permits the owner of a vehicle to, upon written
application to the department of transportation (DOT), order
special registration plates with a hearing impaired processed
emblem designed by the DOT bearing the international symbol
of access for hearing loss. The bill provides that special
registration plates with a hearing impaired processed emblem
shall only be issued if the application is accompanied by a
statement from a physician or audiologist, written on the
physician’s or audiologist’s stationery, stating the nature of
the applicant’s hearing loss. If the application is approved
by the DOT, the special registration plates with a hearing
impaired processed emblem shall be issued to the applicant.
There shall be no fee in addition to the regular annual
registration fee for the special registration plates with a
hearing impaired processed emblem. The bill prohibits the
authorization for special registration plates with a hearing
impaired processed emblem from being renewed without the
applicant furnishing evidence to the DOT that the owner of the
vehicle is still hearing impaired.
The bill also provides that when special registration plates
with a hearing impaired processed emblem are issued to an
applicant, the DOT shall also furnish to the applicant at no
cost three stickers bearing the international symbol of access
for hearing loss. The bill requires the applicant to place one
sticker in the upper left corner of the vehicle’s windshield,
one sticker in the upper left corner of the vehicle’s driver’s
side window, and one sticker, which shall be treated with a
reflective material, in the upper left corner of the vehicle’s
rear window. By operation of law, a violation of the bill is
punishable by a scheduled fine of $20.