An Act relating to child support obligations for incarcerated
parents.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. Section 598.21B, subsection 1, Code 2017, is
amended by adding the following new paragraph:
NEW PARAGRAPH. e. (1) The guidelines prescribed by the
supreme court shall provide for deviation from the guidelines
for incarcerated parents based upon the incarcerated parent’s
earnings, income, or other evidence of ability to pay.
(2) The guidelines shall not treat incarceration of a parent
as voluntary unemployment for the purpose of establishing or
modifying a child support order.
Sec. 2. Section 598.21C, subsection 1, Code 2017, is amended
by adding the following new paragraph:
NEW PARAGRAPH. kk. Incarceration of a party for a period of
at least one hundred eighty calendar days.
Sec. 3. CHILD SUPPORT OBLIGATIONS —— INCARCERATED PARENTS.
1. The child support recovery unit shall elect in the
state plan for child support enforcement under Tit. IV-D
of the federal Social Security Act to initiate review of a
child support order upon notification that a parent will be
incarcerated for more than one hundred eighty calendar days
to ensure that child support orders are based on the parent’s
ability to pay during the period of incarceration.
2. The child support recovery unit shall establish
partnerships with correctional facilities to conduct data
matches, develop electronic interfaces, and implement outreach
strategies to identify and educate incarcerated parents
regarding options and rights relating to review, adjustment,
and modification of a child support order during the period of
incarceration.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
This bill relates to child support obligations of
incarcerated parents.
The bill provides that with regard to the child support
guidelines prescribed by the supreme court, the guidelines
shall provide for a deviation from the guidelines for
incarcerated parents based upon the incarcerated parent’s
earnings, income, or other evidence of ability to pay.
Additionally, the guidelines shall not treat incarceration
of a parent as voluntary unemployment for the purpose of
establishing or modifying a child support order.
The bill provides that incarceration of a party for a period
of at least 180 calendar days constitutes a substantial change
in circumstances as a basis for modification of a child support
order.
The bill requires the child support recovery unit to elect in
the state plan for child support enforcement to initiate review
of a child support order upon notification that a parent will
be incarcerated for more than 180 calendar days to ensure that
child support orders are based on the parent’s ability to pay
during the period of incarceration.
The bill also requires the child support recovery unit to
establish partnerships with correctional facilities to conduct
data matches, develop electronic interfaces, and implement
outreach strategies to identify and educate incarcerated
parents regarding options and rights relating to review,
adjustment, and modification of a child support order during
the period of incarceration.