An Act relating to consumer protection modifying provisions
applicable to consumer security freezes and including
effective date provisions.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. Section 714G.2, Code 2018, is amended to read as
follows:
714G.2 Security freeze.
1. A consumer may submit by certified mail to a consumer
reporting agency a written request for a security freeze to
a consumer reporting agency by first-class mail, telephone,
facsimile, secure internet connection, secure electronic mail,
or other secure electronic contact method. The consumer must
submit proper identification and the applicable fee with the
request. Within five three business days after receiving
the request, the consumer reporting agency shall commence
the security freeze. Within ten three business days after
commencing the security freeze, the consumer reporting agency
shall send a written confirmation to the consumer of the
security freeze, a personal identification number or password,
other than the consumer’s social security number, for the
consumer to use in authorizing the suspension or removal of
the security freeze, including information on how the security
freeze may be temporarily suspended.
2. a. If a consumer requests a security freeze from a
consumer reporting agency that compiles and maintains files
on a nationwide basis, the consumer may request to have the
security freeze applied to any other consumer reporting agency
that compiles and maintains files on consumers on a nationwide
basis.
b. For purposes of this subsection, “consumer reporting
agency that compiles and maintains files on a nationwide basis”
means the same as defined in 15 U.S.C. §1681a(p).
Sec. 2. Section 714G.3, subsection 1, Code 2018, is amended
to read as follows:
1. A consumer may request that a security freeze be
temporarily suspended to allow the consumer reporting agency to
release the consumer credit report for a specific time period.
The consumer reporting agency may shall develop procedures
to expedite the receipt and processing of requests which may
involve the use of telephones by first-class mail, telephone,
facsimile transmissions, the secure internet connection, secure
electronic mail, or other secure electronic media contact
method. The consumer reporting agency shall comply with
the request within three business days after receiving the
consumer’s written request, or within fifteen minutes after
the consumer’s request is received by the consumer reporting
agency through facsimile, the secure internet connection,
secure electronic mail, or other secure electronic contact
method chosen by the consumer reporting agency, or the use of
a telephone, during normal business hours. The consumer’s
request shall include all of the following:
a. Proper identification.
b. The personal identification number or password provided
by the consumer reporting agency.
c. Explicit instructions of the specific time period
designated for suspension of the security freeze.
d. Payment of the applicable fee.
Sec. 3. Section 714G.4, unnumbered paragraph 1, Code 2018,
is amended to read as follows:
A security freeze remains in effect until the consumer
requests that the security freeze be removed. A consumer
reporting agency shall remove a security freeze within three
business days after receiving a request for removal that
includes proper identification of the consumer, and the
personal identification number or password provided by the
consumer reporting agency, and payment of the applicable fee.
Sec. 4. Section 714G.5, Code 2018, is amended to read as
follows:
714G.5 Fees prohibited.
1. A consumer reporting agency shall not charge any fee to
a consumer who is the victim of identity theft for commencing
a security freeze, temporary suspension, or removal if with
the initial security freeze request, the consumer submits a
valid copy of the police report concerning the unlawful use of
identification information by another person.
2. A consumer reporting agency may charge a fee not to
exceed ten dollars to a consumer who is not the victim of
identity theft for each security freeze, removal, or for
reissuing a personal identification number or password if the
consumer fails to retain the original number. The consumer
reporting agency may charge a fee not to exceed twelve dollars
for each temporary suspension of a security freeze.
A consumer reporting agency shall not charge a fee to a
consumer for providing any service pursuant to this chapter,
including but not limited to placing, removing, temporarily
suspending, or reinstating a security freeze.
Sec. 5. Section 714G.8A, subsection 1, paragraph d, Code
2018, is amended by striking the paragraph.
Sec. 6. Section 714G.8A, subsection 3, paragraph d, Code
2018, is amended by striking the paragraph.
Sec. 7. Section 714G.8A, subsection 5, Code 2018, is amended
to read as follows:
5. a. A consumer reporting agency may shall not charge
a reasonable fee, not to exceed five dollars, for each the
placement, or removal, or reinstatement of a protected consumer
security freeze. A consumer reporting agency may not charge
any other fee for a service performed pursuant to this section.
b. Notwithstanding paragraph “a”, a fee may not be charged
by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to either of the
following:
(1) If the protected consumer’s representative has obtained
a police report or affidavit of alleged identity theft under
section 715A.8 and submits a copy of the report or affidavit to
the consumer reporting agency.
(2) A request for the commencement or removal of a protected
consumer security freeze is for a protected consumer who is
under the age of sixteen years at the time of the request and
the consumer reporting agency has a consumer credit report
pertaining to the protected consumer.
Sec. 8. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Act, being deemed of immediate
importance, takes effect upon enactment.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
This bill relates to consumer security freezes.
Current law permits a consumer to submit a request for a
security freeze via certified mail. The bill expands the
methods permitted for a consumer to submit a request for
a security freeze to allow such requests to be submitted
via first-class mail, telephone, facsimile, secure internet
connection, secure electronic mail, or other secure electronic
contact method.
The bill reduces the number of days by which a consumer
reporting agency must commence a security freeze after
receiving a request from five to three business days. The bill
also reduces the number of days by which a consumer reporting
agency must send written confirmation to a consumer after
commencing a security freeze from ten to three business days.
The bill provides that if a consumer requests a security
freeze from a consumer reporting agency that compiles and
maintains files on a nationwide basis, as defined in the bill,
the consumer may request to have the security freeze applied to
any other similar consumer reporting agency.
The bill requires consumer reporting agencies to develop
procedures to expedite the receipt and processing of security
freeze suspension requests received via the same methods
permitted for consumers to submit such requests. The bill
requires a consumer reporting agency to commence a security
freeze suspension within 15 minutes after receiving a request
through telephone, facsimile, secure internet connection,
secure electronic mail, or other secure electronic contact
method.
The bill prohibits consumer reporting agencies from charging
fees to consumers for providing any service pursuant to Code
chapter 714G, including but not limited to placing, removing,
temporarily suspending, or reinstating a security freeze. The
bill also prohibits consumer reporting agencies from charging
fees for placing or removing a protected consumer security
freeze pursuant to Code section 714G.8A. The bill removes
several references to payment of fees in Code chapter 714G.
The bill takes effect upon enactment.