An Act requiring the department of natural resources to include
additional water quality criteria in the master matrix
used to evaluate applications for permits to construct
confinement feeding operation structures.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES —— MASTER
MATRIX —— ADDITIONAL WATER QUALITY CRITERIA. The department
of natural resources shall revise the master matrix as
published in 567 IAC ch. 65, Appendix C to include additional
criteria in the water subcategory. The additional criteria
shall include environmental practices used to reduce soil
erosion and sediment loss, manage nutrients and reduce
contributing contaminant loads to receiving surface waters,
and improve surface water quality. The new criteria shall
include edge-of-field soil and water conservation practices
or edge-of-field erosion control practices, and may include
bioreactors connected to field drainage tile lines, saturated
buffers, prairie grass strips located in drainage areas,
grassed waterways, areas devoted to permanent vegetation cover,
or wetlands.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
BILL’S PROVISIONS. This bill requires the department of
natural resources to revise the master matrix used to evaluate
proposed confinement feeding operation structure sites by
including additional criteria in the water subcategory in
order to account for environmental practices used to reduce
soil erosion and sediment loss, manage nutrients and reduce
contributing contaminant loads to receiving surface waters, and
improve surface water quality.
BACKGROUND —— GENERAL. The bill refers to provisions in
the Iowa administrative code that include the master matrix as
required in Code section 459.305 of the “Animal Agriculture
Compliance Act”. A person constructing a confinement feeding
operation structure may first be required to obtain a permit
issued by the department (Code section 459.303). A confinement
feeding operation is a location in which agricultural animals
are confined and fed in totally roofed structures for 45
days or more in any 12-month period and includes associated
confinement feeding operation structures such as buildings,
manure storage structures, and egg washwater storage structures
(Code section 459.102). A permit is required if a confinement
feeding operation would have an animal unit capacity of
at least 1,000 animal units, which would equal 2,500 swine
weighing over 55 pounds (Code section 459.102), or if the
operation uses an unformed manure storage structure (Code
section 459.303).
BACKGROUND —— MASTER MATRIX. The master matrix is a form
used as part of a process in which a person applying for a
construction permit is awarded points for agreeing to construct
the confinement feeding operation structure or use manure
management practices in a manner that exceeds specific state
law requirements (e.g., a statutory separation distance imposed
between the application of manure and a river or stream as
specified in Code section 459.314). The master matrix is
comprised of three subcategories including impacts of the
confinement feeding operation on air, water, and the community.
A county board of supervisors that adopts a construction
evaluation resolution may evaluate the completed application
and matrix before submitting comments to the department
(Code section 459.304), which decides whether to approve or
disapprove the application and issue the permit (Code section
459.303).