An Act relating to the assessment of certain subdivided real
property and including applicability provisions.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. Section 405.1, Code 2017, is amended to read as
follows:
405.1 Housing development —— tax status —— limitation.
1. a. The board of supervisors of a county may adopt
an ordinance providing that property Property acquired and
subdivided for development of housing on or after January
1, 2011, shall continue to be assessed for taxation in the
manner that it was prior to the acquisition for housing. Each
lot shall continue to be taxed in the manner it was prior
to its acquisition for housing until the lot is sold for
construction or occupancy of housing or five years from the
date of subdivision, whichever is shorter. Upon the sale or
the expiration of the five-year period, the property shall be
assessed for taxation as residential, multiresidential, or
commercial multifamily property, whichever is applicable.
b. Ordinances adopted under this section, to the extent
such ordinances affect the assessment of property subdivided
for development of housing on or after January 1, 2004, but
before January 1, 2011, shall remain in effect or otherwise
be made effective and such ordinances adopted under section
405.1, subsection 1, Code 2011, shall be extended to apply
the ordinances to the period of time ending ten years from
the date of subdivision, and ordinances adopted under section
405.1, subsection 2, Code 2011, shall be extended to apply the
ordinances to the period of time ending eight years from the
date of subdivision.
2. On or after July 27, 2011, the board of supervisors
of a county may amend an ordinance adopted or otherwise made
effective under subsection 1 to extend the period of time
established under subsection 1 to apply the ordinance to a
period of time not to exceed five years beyond the end of the
period of time established under subsection 1. An extension
of an ordinance under this subsection may apply to all or
a portion of the property that was subject to the original
ordinance.
3. A city council may adopt an ordinance affecting
that portion of the applicable property located within the
incorporated area of the city, effectuating an extension of
a county ordinance otherwise eligible to be extended under
subsection 2 and not previously extended by the board of
supervisors. An ordinance by a city council providing for
an extension under this subsection shall be subject to the
limitations of subsection 2.
Sec. 2. Section 441.72, Code 2017, is amended to read as
follows:
441.72 Assessment of platted lots.
1. Except as provided in subsection 2, when When a
subdivision plat is recorded pursuant to chapter 354, the
individual lots within the subdivision plat shall not be
assessed in excess of the total assessment of the land as
acreage or unimproved property for five years after the
recording of the plat or until the lot is actually improved
with permanent construction, whichever occurs first sold for
construction or occupancy of housing. When an individual lot
has been improved with permanent sold for construction or
occupancy of housing, the lot shall be assessed for taxation
purposes as provided in chapter 428 and this chapter.
2. For subdivision plats recorded pursuant to chapter
354 on or after January 1, 2004, but before January 1, 2011,
the individual lots within the subdivision plat shall not
be assessed in excess of the total assessment of the land
as acreage or unimproved property for eight years after the
recording of the plat or until the lot is actually improved
with permanent construction, whichever occurs first. When an
individual lot has been improved with permanent construction,
the lot shall be assessed for taxation purposes as provided in
chapter 428 and this chapter.
3. 2. This section does not apply to special assessment
levies.
Sec. 3. IMPLEMENTATION.
1. This Act shall not be construed to require the refund
or modification of property taxes that are attributable to
assessment years beginning before January 1, 2018, or the
adjustment of property assessments for assessment years
beginning before January 1, 2018.
2. Ordinances adopted under section 405.1 in effect on the
effective date of this Act shall be invalid for purposes of
assessment years beginning on or after January 1, 2018.
Sec. 4. APPLICABILITY. This Act applies to assessment years
beginning on or after January 1, 2018.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
This bill relates to the assessment of certain subdivided
real property.
Current Code section 405.1 authorizes a county board of
supervisors to adopt an ordinance providing that property
acquired and subdivided for development of housing shall
continue to be assessed for taxation in the manner that it was
prior to the acquisition for housing until the lot is sold for
construction or occupancy of housing or five years from the
date of subdivision, whichever is shorter. Code section 405.1
also authorizes time extensions of certain ordinances that
affect the assessment of property subdivided for development
of housing and authorizes the time extensions of certain
ordinances by counties and by cities in the portion of the
applicable area located in the incorporated area of the city.
The bill strikes the authorization for cities and counties
to adopt, amend, or extend such ordinances and provides that
property acquired and subdivided for development of housing
shall continue to be assessed for taxation and taxed in the
manner it was prior to its acquisition for housing until the
lot is sold for construction or occupancy of housing. Under
the bill, upon the sale, the property must be assessed for
taxation as residential, multiresidential, or commercial
multifamily property, whichever is applicable.
Code section 441.72 provides that a platted lot for which
a subdivision plat was recorded is assessed for property tax
purposes as acreage or unimproved property for five years or
until the lot is actually improved with permanent construction,
whichever occurs first. However, for subdivision plats
recorded on or after January 1, 2004, but before January 1,
2011, the time limit is eight years.
The bill strikes the portions of Code section 441.72
relating to the five-year limitation and the eight-year
limitation and provides that when a subdivision plat is
recorded, the individual lots within the subdivision plat shall
not be assessed in excess of the total assessment of the land
as acreage or unimproved property until the lot is sold for
construction or occupancy of housing.
The bill shall not be construed to require the refund
or modification of property taxes that are attributable to
assessment years beginning before January 1, 2018, or the
adjustment of property assessments for assessment years
beginning before January 1, 2018. The bill also provides that
local ordinances adopted under existing Code section 405.1
in effect on the effective date of the bill are invalid for
purposes of assessment years beginning on or after January 1,
2018.
The bill applies to assessment years beginning on or after
January 1, 2018.