An Act requiring the boards of directors of school districts to
appoint student liaisons to the boards.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. Section 279.3, Code 2018, is amended to read as
follows:
279.3 Appointment of secretary and treasurer —— student
liaison.
1. a. The board shall appoint a secretary who shall not be
a teacher employed by the board but may be another employee of
the board. The board shall also appoint a treasurer who may be
another employee of the board. However, the board may appoint
one person to serve as the secretary and the treasurer.
2. b. These officers shall be appointed from outside the
membership of the board and the appointment and qualification
shall be entered of record in the minutes of the secretary.
They shall qualify within ten days following appointment by
taking the oath of office in the manner required by section
277.28 and filing a bond as required by section 291.2 and shall
hold office until their successors are appointed and qualified.
2. The board shall select at least one student to act as
a liaison between the board, administrators, teachers, the
student council, and the general student population. The
board shall develop and implement an application and selection
process for the position of student liaison to the board.
The student liaison shall have a seat at the table of all
board meetings and board subcommittee meetings in a nonvoting
capacity, and shall have access to all nonconfidential
board meeting materials. The student liaison may advocate
for student interests in board meetings, provide school
administrators and board members with student viewpoints,
assist in developing and monitoring the implementation of
education policy, or volunteer to perform other functions of
benefit to the students and the district that the board deems
appropriate for a student to carry out.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
This bill requires the boards of directors of school
districts to select at least one student to act as a liaison
between the board, administrators, teachers, the student
council, and the general student population. The student
liason must have a seat at the table of all board meetings and
board subcommittee meetings in a nonvoting capacity; and have
access to all nonconfidential board meeting materials. The
board must develop and implement an application and selection
process. The student liaison may perform functions of
benefit to the students and the district that the board deems
appropriate for a student to carry out.