An Act prohibiting the department of transportation and local
authorities from requiring permits for the operation of
motor vehicles transporting an implement of husbandry
between fields, locations for repair, or locations for
storage.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. Section 321.453, Code 2017, is amended by adding
the following new subsection:
NEW SUBSECTION. 3. Notwithstanding section 321.463,
321.471, or 321.474, chapter 321E, or any other provision
of law to the contrary, the department or a local authority
shall not require a permit for the operation of a motor
vehicle transporting an implement of husbandry between fields,
locations for repair, or locations for storage of the implement
of husbandry.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
Code section 321.453 exempts certain motor vehicles and
equipment from the provisions of Code chapter 321 (motor
vehicles and law of the road) governing size, weight, and load,
and the permit requirements of Code chapter 321E (vehicles of
excessive size and weight). Such motor vehicles and equipment
include fire apparatus, certain road maintenance equipment,
implements of husbandry when moved or moving upon a highway
that is not a portion of the interstate, and certain equipment
used primarily for construction of permanent conservation
practices on agricultural land. However, such motor vehicles
and equipment are not exempt from the provisions of Code
section 321.463 (maximum gross weight), 321.471 (restrictions
by local authorities), or 321.474 (restrictions by the
department of transportation), which include certain permitting
provisions.
This bill provides that the department of transportation or
a local authority shall not require a permit for the operation
of a motor vehicle transporting an implement of husbandry
between fields, locations for repair, or locations for storage
of the implement of husbandry.