An Act relating to the provision of supported community living
services under Medicaid home and community-based services
waivers, and including effective date and retroactive
applicability provisions.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. MEDICAID HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES
WAIVERS —— SUPPORTED COMMUNITY LIVING SERVICES IN HOME OF
FAMILY MEMBER OR PERSON LEGALLY RESPONSIBLE FOR THE MEMBER ——
REIMBURSEMENT.
1. Beginning March 1, 2017, the department of human services
shall make supported community living services available at a
daily rate to members living in the home of a family member
or of a person legally responsible for the member, who is the
provider of the community living services.
2. The department shall ensure that the provider meets the
provider qualifications specified for the service provided,
that there is a properly executed provider agreement, and that
the family member or person legally responsible for the member
has a unique ability to meet the needs of the member.
3. The department shall ensure that the services provided
by a person who is legally responsible for the member are
deemed extraordinary care and that the provision of care by
the legally responsible person is in the best interest of the
member.
4. For the purposes of this section, “family member”
includes a person related to the member by consanguinity or
affinity, including but not limited to a sibling of the member
or a parent of an adult member; “a person legally responsible
for the member” includes a parent of a member who is a minor
or the spouse of a member; and “extraordinary care” means care
exceeding the range of activities that a legally responsible
individual would ordinarily perform in the household on behalf
of a person without a disability or chronic illness of the
same age, and which care is necessary to ensure the health and
welfare of the member and to avoid institutionalization.
5. A family member or person legally responsible for the
member in whose home the member lives and who is providing
supported community living services under an exception to
policy on or before the effective date of this Act, shall
be allowed to continue to provide the services and to be
reimbursed at the daily rate in effect on the effective date of
this Act until such time as the family member or person legally
responsible for the member transitions to being a supported
community living services provider in accordance with this Act.
6. The department shall amend any Medicaid managed care
contract, shall amend or adopt administrative rules pursuant to
chapter 17A as necessary, and shall seek any federal approval
necessary to amend home and community-based services waivers to
comply with this section, effective March 1, 2017.
Sec. 2. EFFECTIVE UPON ENACTMENT. This Act, being deemed of
immediate importance, takes effect upon enactment.
Sec. 3. RETROACTIVE APPLICABILITY. This Act applies
retroactively to March 1, 2017.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
This bill directs the department of human services,
beginning March 1, 2017, to make available under Medicaid
home and community-based services waivers the provision
of and a daily rate reimbursement for supported community
living services in the home of a family member or of a person
legally responsible for the member, who is the provider of the
community living services.
The department of human services shall ensure that the
provider meets the provider qualifications specified for the
service provided, that there is a properly executed provider
agreement, and that the family member or person legally
responsible for the member has a unique ability to meet the
needs of the member. The department of human services shall
also ensure that the services provided by a person who is
legally responsible for the member are deemed extraordinary
care and that the provision of care by the legally responsible
person is in the best interest of the member.
The bill defines “family member”, “a person legally
responsible for the member”, and “extraordinary care”.
The bill also provides that a family member or person legally
responsible for the member in whose home the member lives and
who is providing supported community living services under an
exception to policy on or before the effective date of the
bill, shall be allowed to continue to provide the services and
to be reimbursed at the daily rate in effect on the effective
date of the bill until such time as the family member or person
legally responsible for the member transitions to being a
supported community living services provider in accordance with
the bill.
The department of human services shall amend any Medicaid
managed care contract, shall amend or adopt any administrative
rules as necessary, and shall seek any federal approval
necessary to amend existing Medicaid home and community-based
services waivers to comply with the bill effective March 1,
2017.
The bill takes effect upon enactment and is retroactively
applicable to March 1, 2017.