An Act relating to pari-mutuel wagering, including horse and
dog racing medication requirements and the applicability
of certain setoff procedures to advance deposit wagering
operators.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:
Section 1. Section 99D.25, subsection 1, paragraph b, Code
2017, is amended to read as follows:
b. “Numbing” means the applying of ice or a freezing device
or substance to the limbs of a horse or dog within two hours
before the start of a race, or a surgical or other procedure
which was, at any time, performed in which the nerves of a
horse or dog were severed, destroyed, injected, or removed.
For purposes of this paragraph, ice is not a freezing device
or substance.
Sec. 2. Section 99D.25A, subsections 2 and 7, Code 2017, are
amended to read as follows:
2. Phenylbutazone shall not may be administered to a
horse in dosages which would result in concentrations of more
than five micrograms of the substance or its metabolites
per milliliter of blood dosage amounts as set by rule
by the commission. In races recognized as graded stakes
thoroughbred races, the commission may establish restrictions
on dosage amounts for phenylbutazone which would result in
concentrations of less than five micrograms of the substance or
its metabolites per milliliter of blood.
7. A horse entered to race with furosemide must be treated
at least four hours prior to post time. The furosemide shall
be administered intravenously by a veterinarian employed by the
owner or trainer of the horse issued a current occupational
license by the commission. The commission shall adopt rules
to ensure that furosemide is administered as provided in this
section. The commission shall require that the practicing
veterinarian deliver an affidavit signed by the veterinarian
which certifies information regarding the treatment of the
horse. The affidavit must be delivered to a commission
veterinarian within twenty minutes following the treatment.
The statement affidavit must at least include the name of the
practicing veterinarian, the tattoo number of the horse, the
location of the barn and stall where the treatment occurred,
the race number of the horse, the name of the trainer, and
the time that the furosemide was administered. Furosemide
shall only be administered in a dose level of no less than
one hundred fifty milligrams and no more than five hundred
milligrams.
Sec. 3. Section 99D.28, Code 2017, is amended by adding the
following new subsection:
NEW SUBSECTION. 8. For purposes of this section, “licensee”
shall also include an advance deposit wagering operator.
EXPLANATION
The inclusion of this explanation does not constitute agreement with
the explanation’s substance by the members of the general assembly.
This bill concerns pari-mutuel wagering under Code chapter
99D.
Code section 99D.25, regulating the drugging or numbing of
race horses or dogs, is amended to provide that in defining
numbing, ice is not a freezing device or substance.
Code section 99D.25A, concerning the administration of
furosemide or phenylbutazone to race horses, is amended. The
bill provides that phenylbutazone may be administered to
a horse in dosage amounts as set by the racing and gaming
commission by rule. Current law specifies dosage amounts
in Code. The bill also provides that furosemide shall be
administered to a horse by a veterinarian licensed by the
commission instead of by a veterinarian employed by the owner
or trainer of the horse. The bill retains the requirement
that the treating veterinarian submit an affidavit about the
treatment to a commission veterinarian, but eliminates the
requirement that the affidavit be delivered within 20 minutes
of the treatment.
Code section 99D.28, concerning setoff requirements, is
amended. The setoff requirements provide that if a person
wins $1,200 or more in one occurrence and owes money to an
eligible public agency, the licensee is required to collect
from the winnings the full amount of the debt prior to paying
any winnings to the person. The bill provides that these
requirements apply to advance deposit wagering operators.