

General Assembly
Raised Bill No. 7173 
January Session, 2017
LCO No. 3676
*03676_______PH_*
Referred to Committee on PUBLIC HEALTH 
Introduced by:
(PH)
AN ACT CONCERNING THE APPOINTMENT OF ASSISTANT REGISTRARS OF VITAL STATISTICS.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Assembly convened:
Section 1. Subsection (a) of section 7-38 of the general statutes is repealed and the following is substituted in lieu thereof (Effective October 1, 2017):
(a) The town clerk of any town who is, ex officio, registrar of vital statistics in such town, and the registrar of vital statistics of any town who is elected under a special law or otherwise appointed pursuant to law, may, unless otherwise provided by charter or ordinance, appoint in writing suitable persons [, not exceeding four in number,] as assistant registrars of vital statistics, who, on being sworn, shall have the powers and perform the duties of such registrar during the time for which they are appointed, not extending beyond the term of office of such registrar. Not later than ten days after a town clerk or registrar of vital statistics appoints an assistant registrar of vital statistics, the town clerk or registrar of vital statistics shall file a notice of such appointment with the Secretary of the State, indicating the name and address of the person appointed, the date and method of such appointment and the law under which the appointment was made. Not later than ten days after a vacancy occurs in the office of assistant registrar of vital statistics, the town clerk or registrar of vital statistics shall notify the Secretary of the State of such vacancy.


This act shall take effect as follows and shall amend the following sections:
Section 1
October 1, 2017
7-38(a)
Statement of Purpose:  
To eliminate the cap on the number of assistant registrars of vital statistics who may be appointed. 
[Proposed deletions are enclosed in brackets. Proposed additions are indicated by underline, except that when the entire text of a bill or resolution or a section of a bill or resolution is new, it is not underlined.]
