

General Assembly
Committee Bill No.  5591 
January Session, 2017
LCO No. 4497
*_____HB05591LAB___030717____*
Referred to Committee on LABOR AND PUBLIC EMPLOYEES 
Introduced by:
(LAB)
AN ACT CONCERNING PAY EQUITY IN THE WORKFORCE. 
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Assembly convened:
Section 1. Section 31-75 of the general statutes is repealed and the following is substituted in lieu thereof (Effective October 1, 2017):
(a) No employer shall discriminate in the amount of compensation paid to any employee on the basis of sex. Any difference in pay based on sex shall be deemed a discrimination within the meaning of this section. 
(b) If an employee can demonstrate that his or her employer discriminates on the basis of sex by paying wages to employees at the employer's business at a rate less than the rate at which the employer pays wages to employees of the opposite sex at such business for equal work on a job, the performance of which requires equal skill, effort and responsibility, and which are performed under [similar] comparable working conditions, such employer must demonstrate that such differential in pay is made pursuant to (1) a seniority system; (2) a merit system; (3) a system which measures earnings by quantity or quality of production; or (4) a differential system based upon a bona fide factor other than sex, such as education, training or experience. Said bona fide factor defense shall apply only if the employer demonstrates that such factor (A) is not based upon or derived from a sex-based differential in compensation, and (B) is job-related and consistent with business necessity. Such defense shall not exist where the employee demonstrates that an alternative employment practice exists that would serve the same business purpose without producing such differential and that the employer has refused to adopt such alternative practice.
(c) No employer shall discharge, expel or otherwise discriminate against any person because such person has opposed any discriminatory compensation practice or because such person has filed a complaint or testified or assisted in any proceeding pursuant to section 31-76.


This act shall take effect as follows and shall amend the following sections:
Section 1
October 1, 2017
31-75


LAB
Joint Favorable
