

General Assembly
Committee Bill No. 6672 
January Session, 2017
LCO No. 4735
*04735HB06672LAB*
Referred to Committee on LABOR AND PUBLIC EMPLOYEES 
Introduced by:
(LAB)
AN ACT CONCERNING SAFETY METRICS.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Assembly convened:
Section 1. Section 31-383 of the general statutes is repealed and the following is substituted in lieu thereof (Effective October 1, 2017):
The commissioner shall conduct research and undertake demonstration projects relating to occupational safety and health issues and problems either within the Labor Department or by grants or contracts. The commissioner may prescribe regulations requiring employers to measure, record and make reports on exposure of employees to toxic substances which he believes may endanger the health or safety of employees. The commissioner shall cooperate with the Director of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health of the Department of Health and Human Services of the United States in establishing such programs of medical examinations and tests as may be necessary to determine the incidence of occupational illness and employee susceptibility to such illnesses. Such programs, on the request of the employer, may be paid for by the commissioner, together with such other assistance as may be required. Not later than January 1, 2018, and annually thereafter, the commissioner shall report, in accordance with section 11-4a of the general statutes, to the joint standing committee of the General Assembly having cognizance of matters relating to labor and public employees, on (1) the number of injured workers in the state and their corresponding demographics, (2) the number of investigations conducted by the Labor Department's Division of Occupational Safety and Health and the federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration, (3) the number of workplace citations issued by the Labor Department's Division of Occupational Safety and Health and the federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration, (4) the number of antiretaliation cases, (5) new standards issued by the Labor Department's Division of Occupational Safety and Health, (6) new regulations issued by the federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration, (7) the number of workplace fatalities, and (8) the number of criminal prosecutions for workplace fatalities. Information obtained under this section shall be made public without revealing the names of individual workers covered by physical examination or special studies and shall be made available to employers, employees and their respective organizations. 


This act shall take effect as follows and shall amend the following sections:
Section 1
October 1, 2017
31-383
Statement of Purpose:  
To provide the legislature with accurate data on the number of injured workers across various occupations in the state. 
[Proposed deletions are enclosed in brackets. Proposed additions are indicated by underline, except that when the entire text of a bill or resolution or a section of a bill or resolution is new, it is not underlined.]


Co-Sponsors: 
REP. MORIN, 28th Dist. 
H.B. 6672        
