

General Assembly
Raised Bill No. 5230 
February Session, 2018
LCO No. 152
*00152_______VA_*
Referred to Committee on VETERANS' AFFAIRS 
Introduced by:
(VA)
AN ACT HONORING CONNECTICUT NATIONAL GUARD MEDAL OF HONOR RECIPIENTS.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Assembly convened:
Section 1. Section 27-39a of the general statutes is repealed and the following is substituted in lieu thereof (Effective March 25, 2019):
(a) The state military training facility in Niantic shall be named Camp [Niantic] Nett in honor of Connecticut Army National Guard Colonel Robert B. Nett, recipient of the congressional medal of honor for his actions on December 14, 1944, during the Second World War.
(b) The state military training facility in Windsor Locks shall be named Camp Hartell in honor of Connecticut Army National Guard First Lieutenant Lee R. Hartell, recipient of the congressional medal of honor for his actions on August 27, 1951, during the Korean hostilities.
Sec. 2. Section 27-19c of the general statutes is repealed and the following is substituted in lieu thereof (Effective March 25, 2019):
There is established an account to be known as the "chargeable transient quarters and billeting account" which shall be a separate, nonlapsing account within the General Fund. The account shall contain any moneys required by law to be deposited in the account, which shall include, but not be limited to, proceeds of room service charges at Camp [Niantic] Nett. Moneys in the account shall be expended by the Adjutant General for the purposes of billeting members of the armed forces at Camp [Niantic] Nett. 


This act shall take effect as follows and shall amend the following sections:
Section 1
March 25, 2019
27-39a
Sec. 2
March 25, 2019
27-19c
Statement of Purpose:  
To recognize Robert B. Nett and Lee R. Hartell, congressional medal of honor recipients and past members of the Connecticut Army National Guard, by renaming two state military training facilities in their honor. 
[Proposed deletions are enclosed in brackets. Proposed additions are indicated by underline, except that when the entire text of a bill or resolution or a section of a bill or resolution is new, it is not underlined.]
