

General Assembly
Raised Bill No. 5192 
February Session, 2018
LCO No. 1096
*01096_______GL_*
Referred to Committee on GENERAL LAW 
Introduced by:
(GL)
AN ACT CONCERNING CERTAIN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE MACHINES.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Assembly convened:
Section 1. (NEW) (Effective from passage) (a) A permittee authorized pursuant to title 30 of the general statutes to sell alcoholic liquor for on-premises consumption may use an automated machine that, upon activation of a payment card by the permittee, may be operated to dispense beer, cider not exceeding six per cent alcohol by volume and wine to the following: (1) An employee of the permittee who is authorized by law to serve alcoholic beverages, or (2) a person whom the permittee has verified to be twenty-one years of age or older who displays a government-issued identification card that matches the name on the payment card. Such verification that a person is twenty-one years of age or older shall be recorded by the permittee or an employee of the permittee.
(b) An automated machine authorized by subsection (a) of this section shall not dispense a serving of more than thirty-two ounces of beer or cider not exceeding six per cent alcohol by volume or ten ounces of wine before the payment card is reactivated by the permittee or an employee of the permittee.
(c) Not later than October 1, 2018, the Department of Consumer Protection shall, pursuant to section 30-6a of the general statutes, amend the regulations of Connecticut state agencies, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 54 of the general statutes, to: (1) Allow for the use of automated machines by permittees and employees of permittees for the dispensing of beer, cider not exceeding six per cent alcohol by volume and wine pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) of this section, (2) ensure that such beer, cider and wine is not initially dispensed from any such automated machine in a serving of more than one drink to any one person for his or her own consumption at any one time, and (3) ensure that second and subsequent servings of beer, cider and wine from any such automated machine is allowed only after the first serving has been substantially disposed of or consumed by such person.


This act shall take effect as follows and shall amend the following sections:
Section 1
from passage
New section
Statement of Purpose:  
To allow the use of self-serve alcoholic liquor machines on certain permit premises. 
[Proposed deletions are enclosed in brackets. Proposed additions are indicated by underline, except that when the entire text of a bill or resolution or a section of a bill or resolution is new, it is not underlined.]
