

General Assembly
Substitute Bill No. 51 
February Session, 2018
*_____SB00051FIN___040618____*
AN ACT CONCERNING THE FUNDING AND EXPANSION OF CERTAIN ADVANCED MANUFACTURING CERTIFICATE PROGRAMS. 
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Assembly convened:
Section 1. (NEW) (Effective July 1, 2018) (a) As used in this section and sections 2 and 3 of this act:
(1) "Public institution of higher education" means the institutions of higher education identified in subdivision (2) of section 10a-1 of the general statutes; and
(2) "Qualifying advanced manufacturing certificate program" means a for-credit or noncredit sub-baccalaureate advanced manufacturing certificate program offered by a public institution of higher education in which at least seventy-five per cent of the graduates of such certificate program are employed in a field related to or requiring such certificate in the year following such students' graduation. 
(b) The Board of Regents for Higher Education shall establish a program to provide supplemental funding grants to public institutions of higher education for the support and expansion of qualifying advanced manufacturing certificate programs offered by such institutions. Such program shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of this section and sections 2 and 3 of this act. 
(c) A public institution of higher education may submit an application to the Board of Regents for Higher Education for a supplemental funding grant under this section for each qualifying advanced manufacturing certificate program offered by such institution. An application shall be made at such time and in such manner as the board prescribes. An application shall include, but need not be limited to, documentation substantiating the employment rate of the graduates of the qualifying advanced manufacturing certificate program and an explanation of how the institution will use the supplemental funding grant to support or expand the qualifying advanced manufacturing certificate program. An institution that receives a supplemental funding grant under this section shall use such grant for the purpose of supporting or expanding the qualifying advanced manufacturing certificate program.
(d) Not later than July 1, 2019, and annually thereafter, the Board of Regents for Higher Education shall submit a request to the Department of Revenue Services to segregate, in accordance with the provisions of section 2 of this act, a portion of the average income tax liability of graduates of qualifying advanced manufacturing certificate programs who are employed in a field related to or requiring such certificate in the year following such students' graduation. To assist the Department of Revenue Services in calculating the amount of income tax liability to be segregated, the board shall provide the department with the following data: (1) The average annual salary of graduates of qualifying advanced manufacturing certificate programs for the preceding ten-year period, and (2) the total number of graduates of the qualifying advanced manufacturing certificate programs for the prior fiscal year that are employed in a field related to or requiring such certificate.
(e) Not later than March 1, 2020, and annually thereafter, the Board of Regents for Higher Education shall submit a report, in accordance with the provisions of section 11-4a of the general statutes, to the joint standing committee of the General Assembly having cognizance of matters relating to higher education and employment advancement regarding the supplemental funding grant program for qualifying advanced manufacturing certificate programs. Such report shall include, but need not be limited to, the amount of funds deposited in the advanced manufacturing certificate programs account established pursuant to section 3 of this act, the graduation and salary data described in subsection (d) of this section, how public institutions of higher education have expended supplemental funding grants and any recommendations for expansion of the supplemental funding grant program.
(f) The Board of Regents for Higher Education may accept private donations for the purposes of this section. Any private donations accepted by the board shall be deposited in the advanced manufacturing certificate programs account, established pursuant to section 3 of this act.
Sec. 2. (NEW) (Effective July 1, 2018) For purposes of the supplemental funding grant program for qualifying advanced manufacturing certificate programs established pursuant to section 1 of this act, for the taxable year commencing on or after January 1, 2019, and each taxable year thereafter, the Commissioner of Revenue Services shall use the qualifying advanced manufacturing certificate programs data provided by the Board of Regents for Higher Education pursuant to subsection (d) of section 1 of this act to calculate and segregate an amount equal to twenty-five per cent of the average annual income tax liability of graduates of qualifying advanced manufacturing certificate programs for the preceding ten-year period multiplied by the total number of graduates of such programs for the prior fiscal year that are employed in a field related to or requiring such certificate. The commissioner shall annually deposit such segregated funds into the advanced manufacturing certificate programs account established pursuant to section 3 of this act.
Sec. 3. (NEW) (Effective July 1, 2018) There is established an advanced manufacturing certificate programs account which shall be a separate, nonlapsing account within the General Fund. Funds segregated by the Commissioner of Revenue Services pursuant to section 2 of this act and any private donations accepted pursuant to subsection (f) of section 1 of this act shall be deposited in the account. The moneys in said account shall be expended by the board for the purpose of providing supplemental funding grants to public institutions of higher education that offer qualifying advanced manufacturing certificate programs pursuant to section 1 of this act. The State Treasurer shall invest the proceeds of the account. Investment earnings, after paying any costs incurred by the State Treasurer in administering the account, shall be credited to the General Fund. On or before September 1, 2019, and annually thereafter, the State Treasurer shall notify the Board of Regents for Higher Education of the total amount deposited in the account.


This act shall take effect as follows and shall amend the following sections:
Section 1
July 1, 2018
New section
Sec. 2
July 1, 2018
New section
Sec. 3
July 1, 2018
New section
Statement of Legislative Commissioners:  
In Section 1, "subdivisions (1) and (2)" was changed to "subdivision (2)" in Subsec. (a) for internal consistency, and Subsecs. (b), (c) and (e) were reworded for accuracy and clarity; in Section 1(d), "For purposes of" was changed to "To assist the Department of Revenue Services in" for clarity; in Section 2, "for the preceding ten-year period" was added and "for the prior fiscal year" was moved for consistency with Section 1(d); in Section 3, "pursuant to section 1 of this act" was moved and "advanced manufacturing" was added for clarity; and throughout the bill, "supplemental funding grants program" was changed to "supplemental funding grant program" for clarity.


HED
Joint Favorable Subst. C/R
FIN
FIN
Joint Favorable Subst.-LCO
