

General Assembly
Raised Bill No. 413 
February Session, 2018
LCO No. 1022
*01022_______GAE*
Referred to Committee on GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION AND ELECTIONS 
Introduced by:
(GAE)
AN ACT CONCERNING THE TOWN SCHOOL COMMITTEE IN THE TOWN OF BROOKLYN.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Assembly convened:
Section 1. Section 1 of number 256 of the special acts of 1929 is amended to read as follows (Effective July 1, 2018):
At the annual town election of the town of Brooklyn to be held on the first Monday of October, 1929, and biennially thereafter, there shall be elected three selectmen, two auditors, five constables, a collector of taxes, one member of the board of assessors [,] and one member of the board of relief, [and three members of the town school committee,] each of whom shall hold office for two years from the date of his election or until his successor shall have been elected and shall have qualified. There shall also be elected, at said election and biennially thereafter, a town clerk and a town treasurer, each of whom shall hold office for two years from the first Monday in January next succeeding his election. There shall also be elected, at said election, one member of the board of assessors [,] and one member of the board of relief, [and three members of the town school committee,] each of whom shall hold office for one year from the first Monday of October, 1930, or until his successor shall have been elected and shall have qualified. On and after July 1, 2018, the election, number and term of members of the town school committee shall be in accordance with the general statutes.
Sec. 2. Section 2 of number 256 of the special acts of 1929, as amended by number 367 of the special acts of 1931, is amended to read as follows (Effective July 1, 2018):
At the biennial election of the town of Brooklyn to be held on the first Monday of October, 1931, and biennially thereafter, there shall be elected three members of the board of assessors, and three members of the board of relief, each of whom shall hold office for two years from the date of his election and until his successor shall be elected and shall have qualified. [; and there shall be elected at said biennial election held on the first Monday of October, 1931, and biennially thereafter, six members of the town school committee, three of whom shall be from each major political party, and each of whom shall hold office for two years from the date of his election or until his successor shall be elected and shall have qualified.]


This act shall take effect as follows and shall amend the following sections:
Section 1
July 1, 2018
Number 256 of the special acts of 1929, Sec. 1
Sec. 2
July 1, 2018
Number 256 of the special acts of 1929, Sec. 2
Statement of Purpose:  
To require that the election, number and term of members of the Brooklyn town school committee comply with the general statutes.
[Proposed deletions are enclosed in brackets. Proposed additions are indicated by underline, except that when the entire text of a bill or resolution or a section of a bill or resolution is new, it is not underlined.]
