

General Assembly
Substitute Bill No. 5426 
February Session, 2018
*_____HB05426GAE___032618____*
AN ACT CONCERNING ELECTION DAY REGISTRATION LOCATIONS. 
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Assembly convened:
Section 1. Subsections (c) and (d) of section 9-19j of the general statutes are repealed and the following is substituted in lieu thereof (Effective from passage):
(c) (1) The registrars of voters shall designate a location for the completion and processing of election day registration applications on election day, [provided the] except that when the registrars of voters fail to agree on the designation of such a location by the thirty-first day prior to election day, the town clerk shall forthwith make such designation. The registrars of voters shall have access to the state-wide centralized voter registration system [from such location] at any such location designated by the registrars of voters or the town clerk, as the case may be.
(2) The registrars of voters may appoint one or more election officials to serve at such location and may delegate to such election officials any of the responsibilities assigned to the registrars of voters. The registrars of voters shall supervise such election officials and train such election officials to be election day registration election officials.
(d) Any person applying to register on election day under the provisions of subsections (a) to (i), inclusive, of this section shall make application in accordance with the provisions of section 9-20, provided (1) on election day, the applicant shall appear in person at the location designated [by the registrars of voters] for election day registration pursuant to subdivision (1) of subsection (c) of this section, (2) an applicant who is a student enrolled at an institution of higher education may submit a current photo identification card issued by [said] such institution in lieu of the identification required by section 9-20, and (3) the applicant shall declare under oath that the applicant has not previously voted in the election. If the information that the applicant is required to provide under section 9-20 and subsections (a) to (i), inclusive, of this section does not include proof of the applicant's residential address, the applicant shall also submit identification that shows the applicant's bona fide residence address, including, but not limited to, a learner's permit issued under section 14-36 or a utility bill that has the applicant's name and current address and that has a due date that is not later than thirty days after the election or, in the case of a student enrolled at an institution of higher education, a registration or fee statement from such institution that has the applicant's name and current address.


This act shall take effect as follows and shall amend the following sections:
Section 1
from passage
9-19j(c) and (d)
Statement of Legislative Commissioners:  
In Subsec. (c)(1), the language was restructured for clarity.


GAE
Joint Favorable Subst. -LCO
