

General Assembly
Raised Bill No. 229 
February Session, 2018
LCO No. 1160
*01160_______VA_*
Referred to Committee on VETERANS' AFFAIRS 
Introduced by:
(VA)
AN ACT CONCERNING MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES AND CIVIL SERVICE EXAMINATIONS.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Assembly convened:
Section 1. Section 5-224 of the general statutes is repealed and the following is substituted in lieu thereof (Effective October 1, 2018):
Any veteran who served in time of war, if such veteran is not eligible for disability compensation or pension from the United States through the Veterans' Administration, or the spouse of such veteran who by reason of such veteran's disability is unable to pursue gainful employment, or the unmarried surviving spouse of such veteran, and if such person has attained at least the minimum earned rating on any examination held for an original appointment for the purpose of establishing a candidate list to fill a vacancy in accordance with subsection (d) of section 5-228, shall have five points added to his or her earned rating. Any such veteran, or the spouse of such veteran who by reason of such veteran's disability is unable to pursue gainful employment, or the unmarried surviving spouse of such veteran, if such person is eligible for such disability compensation or pension and if [he or she] such person has attained at least the minimum earned rating on any such examination held for an original appointment for the purpose of establishing a candidate list to fill a vacancy in accordance with subsection (d) of section 5-228, shall have ten points added to his or her earned rating. Any person who has been honorably discharged from or released under honorable conditions from active service in the armed forces of the United States, and who has served in a military action for which such person received or was entitled to receive a campaign badge or expeditionary medal, shall have five points added to his or her earned rating if such person has attained at least the minimum earned rating on any such examination held for an original appointment for the purpose of establishing a candidate list to fill a vacancy in accordance with subsection (d) of section 5-228 and such person is not otherwise eligible to receive additional points pursuant to this section. Any person who is a member of the armed forces, as defined in section 27-103, and who is in the final year of an enlistment contract with any branch of the armed forces shall have five points added to his or her earned rating if such person has attained at least the minimum earned rating on any such examination held for an original appointment for the purpose of establishing a candidate list to fill a vacancy in accordance with subsection (d) of section 5-228. Names of any such persons shall be placed upon the candidate lists in the order of such augmented ratings. Credits shall be based upon examinations with a possible rating of one hundred points. 


This act shall take effect as follows and shall amend the following sections:
Section 1
October 1, 2018
5-224
Statement of Purpose:  
To provide five bonus points on civil service examinations to any member of the armed forces who is in the final year of such member's enlistment contract with a branch of the armed forces.
[Proposed deletions are enclosed in brackets. Proposed additions are indicated by underline, except that when the entire text of a bill or resolution or a section of a bill or resolution is new, it is not underlined.]
