CONCERNING
DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Colorado:
SECTION 1. In Colorado Revised Statutes, 12-43.4-104, repeal
(6) as follows:
12-43.4-104. Applicability - retail marijuana. (6) On or before
April 1, 2014, and on or before April 1 each year thereafter, the state
licensing authority shall submit a report to the joint budget committee and
the finance committees of the senate and house of representatives, or any
successor committees, on:
(a) The progress that the state licensing authority is making in
processing licenses;
(b) An overview of the retail marijuana and retail marijuana
products markets, including but not limited to actual and anticipated
market demand and market supply;
(c) Detailing the amount of revenue generated by medical and
retail marijuana, including applicable excise taxes, sales taxes, application
and license fees, and any other fees, and detailing the expenses incurred
by the state licensing authority, broken down into categories as
determined by the authority;
(d) The number of applications for conversion from medical
marijuana licensees to retail marijuana establishments;
(e) The number of persons who have filed a notice of intent to
apply for licensure pursuant to subparagraph (I) of paragraph (b) of
subsection (1) of this section; and
(f) The enforcement measures taken against persons licensed
pursuant to this article for violation of regulations promulgated pursuant
to this article.
SECTION 2. In Colorado Revised Statutes, 12-47-601, repeal (8)
as follows:
12-47-601. Suspension - revocation - fines. (8) Each local
licensing authority shall report all actions taken to impose fines,
suspensions, and revocations to the state licensing authority in a manner
as required by the state licensing authority. No later than January 15 of
each year, a report of the preceding year's actions in which fines,
suspensions, or revocations were imposed by local licensing authorities
and by the state licensing authority shall be compiled by the state
licensing authority. One copy of said report shall be filed with the chief
clerk of the house of representatives, one copy shall be filed with the
secretary of the senate, and six copies shall be filed in the joint legislative
library.
SECTION 3. In Colorado Revised Statutes, repeal 24-35-204
(3)(k).
SECTION 4. In Colorado Revised Statutes, repeal 24-35-211 (2).
SECTION 5. In Colorado Revised Statutes, 26-2-104, amend
(2)(f) as follows:
26-2-104. Public assistance programs - electronic benefits
transfer service - joint reports with department of revenue - signs -
rules. (2) (f) (I) On or before January 1, 2016, and July 1, 2016, and on
or before each January 1 thereafter, the department of revenue and the
state department shall each submit and present the reports at the same
meeting on electronic benefits transfers to the state, veterans, and military
affairs committees of the senate and house of representatives, the health
and human services committee of the senate, and the public health care
and human services committee of the house of representatives, or any
successor committees. The reports must list the number of instances that
a client accessed cash benefits through the electronic benefits transfer
service through automated teller machines located in each type of
establishment described in paragraph (a) of this subsection (2) or any
other establishment in which a client is prohibited from accessing benefits
by federal law.
(II) PURSUANT TO SECTION 24-1-136 (11)(a)(I), THIS SUBSECTION
(2)(f) IS REPEALED, EFFECTIVE JANUARY 2, 2019.
SECTION 6. In Colorado Revised Statutes, 39-22-522.5, repeal
(12) and (13) as follows:
39-22-522.5. Conservation easement tax credits - dispute
resolution - legislative declaration. (12) (a) On or before July 1, 2011,
and on a quarterly basis thereafter, the executive director shall provide a
report to the joint budget committee and the finance committees of the
general assembly describing:
(I)   The number of tax credits claimed pursuant to section
39-22-522 for which the executive director mailed a notice of deficiency,
notice of rejection of refund claim, or notice of disallowance pursuant to
section 39-21-103;
(II) The number of such cases sent to the conservation easement
oversight commission for review pursuant to section 12-61-725, C.R.S.;
(III) The number of such cases returned to the executive director
with the advice of the conservation easement oversight commission
created in section 12-61-725 (1), C.R.S., and the action, if any, taken by
the department of revenue on the cases returned by the commission;
(IV) The number and progress of any cases that are in a mediation
process and the status of such mediation;
(V) The number of cases referred to the attorney general's office
for resolution;
(VI) The number of cases finally resolved by the department of
revenue;
(VII) The amount of deficient taxes, interest, and penalties
determined to be owed or waived by the department of revenue in
administering the resolution of cases;
(VIII) The number and total amount of credits that were originally
contested but subsequently allowed to be claimed in full; and
(IX) The amount of moneys expended by the department of
revenue in administering the resolution of cases.
(b) The reporting requirements of subparagraphs (II) and (III) of
paragraph (a) of this subsection (12) shall not apply for conservation
easements donated on or after January 1, 2014.
(13) On or before March 15, 2012, and on a quarterly basis
thereafter, the state court administrator shall provide a report to the joint
budget committee and the finance committees of the general assembly
describing:
(a) The number of taxpayers electing to appeal pursuant to
subsection (2) of this section;
(b) The number of cases pending before the district courts or on
appeal before other courts;
(c) The number of cases finally resolved;
(d) The amount of moneys estimated to have been expended by
the courts in administering the appeals; and
(e)    The amount of deficient taxes, interest, and penalties
determined to be owed or waived in connection with the appeals.
SECTION 7. In Colorado Revised Statutes, 42-1-229, add (2) as
follows:
42-1-229. Report. (2) PURSUANT TO SECTION 24-1-136 (11)(a)(I),
THIS SECTION IS REPEALED, EFFECTIVE JULY 2, 2018.
SECTION 8. In Colorado Revised Statutes, 42-3-302, repeal (2)
as follows:
42-3-302. Special plate fees. (2) The executive director of the
department shall make an annual report by March 1 of each year to the
general assembly. Such report shall be open for public inspection and
shall include:
(a) A summary of the department's activities for the previous year;
(b) A statement of plate revenues;
(c) Information regarding special plate purchases;
(d) Expenses of the department;
(e) Allocation of remaining revenues; and
(f)    Any recommendations for changes in statutes that the
executive director deems necessary or desirable.
SECTION 9. In Colorado Revised Statutes, 42-4-305, repeal (11)
as follows:
42-4-305. Powers and duties of executive director - automobile
inspection and readjustment program - basic emissions program -
enhanced emissions program - clean screen program - rules. (11) The
executive director shall report to the transportation legislation review
committee annually on the effectiveness of the quality assurance and
enforcement measures contained in this section, the overall motorist
compliance rates with inspections for registration denial, and the status
of state implementation plan compliance pertaining to quality assurance.
This annual report shall be submitted to the commission in May of each
year for incorporation into appropriate annual and biennial reporting
requirements. Reports shall cover the previous calendar year.
SECTION 10. Act subject to petition - effective date. This act
takes effect at 12:01 a.m. on the day following the expiration of the
ninety-day period after final adjournment of the general assembly (August
9, 2017, if adjournment sine die is on May 10, 2017); except that, if a
referendum petition is filed pursuant to section 1 (3) of article V of the
state constitution against this act or an item, section, or part of this act
within such period, then the act, item, section, or part will not take effect
unless approved by the people at the general election to be held in
November 2018 and, in such case, will take effect on the date of the
official declaration of the vote thereon by the governor.