CONCERNING THE IMPACT OF FEDERAL TAX REFORM ON THE STATE
AND AN ENCOURAGEMENT TO THE STATE'S CONGRESSIONAL
DELEGATION TO PASS REFORMS THAT MAKE THE FEDERAL TAX
SYSTEM SIMPLE, EASY TO UNDERSTAND, AND NOT PRONE TO TAX
AVOIDANCE EFFORTS.
WHEREAS, Well-designed tax systems provide the money needed
to support government institutions, services, and programs that protect
people and promote general public welfare, and the money to make
investments in infrastructure and other public goods that ensure equal
economic opportunity, reward entrepreneurship, and promote job growth;
and
WHEREAS, The current federal individual income tax system
originated with the 16th Amendment to the United States Constitution,
granting the federal government the authority to levy a tax on income; and
WHEREAS, Congress codified the modern legal foundation for
income taxation in 1939 in the first formal Internal Revenue Code; and
WHEREAS, The Internal Revenue Code was updated in 1954 in
the first wide-sweeping tax reform, and that Code remained the primary
framework of the income tax system, but became increasingly complex
through a combination of high tax rates and a wide range of tax
deductions and tax shelters; and
WHEREAS, The Tax Reform Act of 1986 eliminated many
deductions in exchange for simplifying and reducing tax rates; and
WHEREAS, The Internal Revenue Code has a steady pattern of
growing complexity with once-every-generation action to reform and
simplify the process; and
WHEREAS, Federal tax law spans 70,000 pages and as a result,
the current tax system is widely regarded as complex, unfair, unwieldy,
and inefficient. The sheer volume alone reflects many bargains made over
time, thus moving away from anyone's concept of an ideal way to raise
revenue fairly and efficiently; and
WHEREAS, This is a bipartisan issue. "A Better Way for Tax
Reform", the Republican blueprint snapshot for tax reform, says "Our tax
code is a mess, and that's putting it lightly. Multiple brackets. High rates.
Special interest breaks everywhere. Rules and regulations that are too
complicated to understand. It costs more and more each year just to do
your taxes, let alone pay them. All of this drags people down and leaves
businesses buried in paperwork and compliance problems."; and
WHEREAS, In 2016, the USA Today editorial board said, "The
U.S. corporate tax system is an unholy mess. This is evident in the piles
of cash that U.S. companies hoard overseas . . . five top tech companies
alone - Alphabet, Apple, Cisco Systems, Microsoft and Oracle -
collectively held $504 billion in cash at the end of last year, 87.5% of
which was parked abroad . . . The mess is also evident in so-called
corporate inversions, a favored ruse whereby a U.S.-based company buys
a smaller overseas company and claims its country (with its lower tax
rates) as its new corporate home."; and
WHEREAS, Congressional leadership has indicated it will focus
on tax reform, both for corporations and individuals, this year so as to
correct and simplify the Internal Revenue Code; and
WHEREAS, As taxes are levied now, tax planning allows
individuals and companies to divert taxable earning and assets to
minimize the tax owed in a multitude of ways. This leaves less money for
important government priorities such as public safety, roads, and
education; and
WHEREAS, Over the past several decades, corporations have been
paying a smaller and smaller share of the total federal tax burden. In
1952, corporate income taxes funded about 32% of the federal tax burden.
By 2015, this had fallen to 10.6%; and
WHEREAS, The current tax code also provides many ways to
avoid paying individual income tax, but such methods are out of reach for
almost all average individual income taxpayers. Since 1992, the
percentage of income tax paid by the 400 highest earning taxpayers was
27%. By 2012, that figure had fallen to 17%; and
WHEREAS, In what is called an "inversion", the current tax code
rewards companies for relocating their legal domicile to a lower-tax
nation while the company continues its operations in the United States,
imposing the same public costs and using the same infrastructure as
before the inversion; and
WHEREAS, Sheltering income, in addition to reducing federal
income taxes collected, also reduces the state's income tax revenues; and
WHEREAS, Federal tax reform is a critical issue for Colorado;
now, therefore,
Be It Resolved by the House of Representatives of the Seventy-first
General Assembly of the State of Colorado:
That we, the members of the Colorado House of Representatives,
believe:
(1) The federal tax system should be simple and easy to
understand, with minimum compliance cost and complexity. The system
should not be prone to exploitation for the purpose of tax avoidance, as
today's system is;
(2) The tax system should be transparent so that the public will
know that the tax system meets standards of fairness and will be assured
that individuals and corporations are all meeting their obligations; and
(3) Any tax reform that occurs should adhere to the above
considerations.
Be It Further Resolved, That copies of this House Resolution be
sent to each member of Colorado's congressional delegation.