The people of the State of California do enact as follows:SECTION 1. Section 849 of the Penal Code is amended to read:849. (a) When an arrest is made without a warrant by a peace officer or private person, the person arrested, if not otherwise released, shall, without unnecessary delay, be taken before the nearest or most accessible magistrate in the county in which the offense is triable, and a complaint stating the charge against the arrested person shall be laid before the magistrate.(b) A peace officer may release from custody, instead of taking the person before a magistrate, a person arrested without a warrant in the following circumstances:(1) The officer is satisfied that there are insufficient grounds for making a criminal complaint against the person arrested.(2) The person arrested was arrested for intoxication only, and no further proceedings are desirable.(3) The person was arrested only for being under the influence of a controlled substance or drug and the person is delivered to a facility or hospital for treatment and no further proceedings are desirable.(4) The person was arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs and the person is delivered to a hospital for medical treatment that prohibits immediate delivery before a magistrate.(5) The person was arrested and subsequently delivered to a hospital or other urgent care facility, including, but not limited to, a facility for the treatment of co-occurring
      substance use disorders, for mental health evaluation and treatment, and no further proceedings are desirable.(c) The record of arrest of a person released pursuant to
      paragraph (1), (3), or (5) of subdivision (b) shall include a record of release. Thereafter, the arrest shall not be deemed an arrest, but a detention only.SEC. 2. Section 851.6 of the Penal Code is amended to read:851.6. (a) In any case in which a person is arrested and released pursuant to paragraph (1), (3), or (5) of subdivision (b) of Section 849, the person shall be issued a certificate, signed by the releasing officer or his superior officer, describing the action as a detention.(b) In any case in which a person is arrested and released and an
      accusatory pleading is
      not filed charging him or her with an offense, the person shall be issued a certificate by the law enforcement agency which arrested him or her describing the action as a detention.(c) The Attorney General shall prescribe the form and content of the certificate.(d) Any reference to the action as an arrest shall be deleted from the arrest records of the arresting agency and of the
      Department of Justice. Thereafter, any record of the action shall refer to it as a detention.SEC. 3. Section 1417.7 of the Penal Code is amended to read:1417.7. Not less than 15 days before any proposed disposition of an exhibit pursuant to Section 1417.3, 1417.5, or 1417.6, the court shall notify the district attorney or other prosecuting attorney, the attorney of record for each party, and each party who is not represented by counsel of the proposed disposition. Before the disposition, any party, at his or her own expense, may cause to be prepared a photographic or digital record of all or part of the exhibit by a person who is not a party or attorney of a party. The clerk of the court shall observe the taking of the photographic or digital record and, upon receipt of a declaration of the person making the photographic or digital record that the duplicate delivered to the clerk is
      a true, unaltered, and unretouched duplicate of the photographic or digital
      record taken in the presence of the clerk, the clerk shall certify the photographic or digital record as such without charge and retain it unaltered for a period of 60 days following the final determination of the criminal action or proceeding. For purposes of this section, a “photographic record” of the exhibit means a photographic image of the exhibit or its equivalent stored in any form. For purposes of this section, a “duplicate” means a counterpart produced by a mechanical, photographic, chemical, electronic, or other equivalent process or technique that accurately reproduces the original. A certified photographic or digital record of exhibits shall not be deemed inadmissible pursuant to Section 1521 or 1522 of the Evidence Code.SEC. 4. This act is an urgency statute necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, or safety within the meaning of Article IV of the California Constitution and shall go into immediate effect. The facts constituting the necessity are:In order to allow for important criminal
    procedure reform relating to arrests and disposition of evidence at the earliest time possible, it is necessary for this act to take effect immediately.