
      
        WHEREAS, John Fitzgerald Kennedy, the 35th President of the United States of America, was born at Brookline, Massachusetts, on the 29th Day of May, 1917, the second of the nine children of Joseph P. Kennedy and his wife, the former Rose Fitzgerald; and
      
      
        WHEREAS, after a youth beset by health problems, which he largely overcame, Kennedy matriculated at Harvard College in 1936, graduating cum laude in 1940 with a Bachelor of Arts in government and international relations; having exhibited, even as a college student, a profound interest in the state of the world, sailing to England in June 1938 with his father and older brother to work at the American embassy in London, where the elder Kennedy served as President Franklin D. Roosevelt’s U.S. Ambassador to the Court of St. James; and
      
      
        WHEREAS, in 1939, as a college student, Kennedy toured Europe, the Soviet Union, the Balkans, and the Middle East in preparation for his Harvard senior honors thesis (which became a best-selling book, entitled “Why England Slept”), also visiting Czechoslovakia and Germany before returning to London on September 1, 1939, the day that Germany invaded Poland to mark the beginning of World War II; and 
      
      
        WHEREAS, in 1940, Kennedy attempted to enter U.S. Army Officer Candidate School but was medically disqualified due to his chronic lower back problems; and, with characteristic persistence, he exercised for months to straighten his back before joining the U.S. Naval Reserve on September 24, 1941, where he was commissioned as an ensign on October 26, 1941; and
      
      
        WHEREAS, he completed the Motor Torpedo Boat Squadrons Training Center on December 2, 1942, and was assigned to Motor Torpedo Squadron Four, eventually being assigned to duty in the South Pacific, where he commanded two patrol torpedo (PT) boats, including PT 109, the dramatic story of the sinking of which and Kennedy’s subsequent heroic rescue of several of his crew members, in which he injured himself, became a hallmark of his 1960 presidential campaign; and
      
      
        WHEREAS, following his return to civilian life after World War II, Kennedy eventually turned to pursuit of a political career, winning election to the U.S. House of Representatives from Massachusetts in 1946, and, after serving three terms in Congress, defeating incumbent U.S. Senator Henry Cabot Lodge to win a seat in the U.S. Senate in 1952; and
      
      
        WHEREAS, Kennedy ran for the office of President in 1960 against incumbent Vice President Richard M. Nixon and, after a close and hard-fought campaign, which saw the first-ever televised presidential debates, of which Kennedy was judged the winner, he won the popular vote by just two-tenths of one percent; and
      
      
        WHEREAS, in so doing, he became, at age 43, the youngest person ever elected President of the United States; and
      
      
        WHEREAS, the election of the vibrant young man as President energized a whole generation of young American men and women to take an interest in their government and in America’s place in the world, saying in his inaugural speech the memorable words, “Ask not what your country can do for you; ask what you can do for your country,” and urging the nations of the world to join together to fight what he called the “common enemies of man: tyranny, poverty, disease, and war itself”; and
      
      
        WHEREAS, among his most memorable achievements was the establishment of the Peace Corps, first by executive order on March 1, 1961, some six weeks after taking office, and authorized by Congress on September 21, 1961, with the stated purpose:  “To promote world peace and friendship through a Peace Corps, which shall make available to interested countries and areas men and women of the United States qualified for service abroad and willing to serve, under conditions of hardship if necessary, to help the peoples of such countries and areas in meeting their needs for trained manpower”; and
      
      
        WHEREAS, on November 22, 1963, after approximately 1,000 days as President, presiding over times of great accomplishment and great challenge, including the Civil Rights struggle in the South and the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962, President Kennedy was shot and killed by an assassin’s bullet while he and his wife, First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy, were riding in a motorcade through the streets of Dallas, Texas, thus ending in one horrendous instant a life of extraordinary purpose and great promise; and
      
      
        WHEREAS, in the years that followed, the great Civil Rights leader, Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., with whom the Kennedys had worked closely, and the President’s younger brother, U.S. Attorney General and later U.S. Senator Robert F. Kennedy, also fell victim to assassins; and
      
      
        WHEREAS, the memory of this remarkable man, his wife and children, his brothers Robert and Edward “Ted” Kennedy, both U.S. Senators, and Dr. King and their leadership, which set lasting standards for public service, as well as the terrible events that ended three of those lives prematurely, remain permanently emblazoned on the minds and memories of all Americans who lived through those times; and
      
      
        WHEREAS, their efforts led in large part to a sequence of events that resulted in the election in 2008 of Barack Obama as the nation’s 44
        
          th
        
         President and its first African American President, a man who, at least in part, embodied so much of what the Kennedys and Dr. King had worked to achieve during their lives;
      
      
        NOW, THEREFORE:
      
      
        BE IT RESOLVED by the Senate of the 149th General Assembly of the State of Delaware that the members do hereby remember and honor the life and mark the centennial of John Fitzgerald Kennedy, who served his country in war and peace in a career which culminated in his service as the 35th President of the United States.
      
      
        BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that we celebrate as well the lives of his brothers, Senators Robert and Edward Kennedy, and of their ally in the Civil Rights struggle, the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., and honor their vision for a greater America, leading our nation and the world toward a permanent and lasting peace and equality among all people.
      
      
        BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that suitable copies of this resolution be forwarded upon its passage to the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum in Boston and the Delaware Public Archives.
      
      
         
      
    

      
        SYNOPSIS
      
      
        This resolution marks the centennial of the birth of President John F. Kennedy and honors his memory and those of his brothers, Robert and Edward, and of their ally in the Civil Rights struggle of the 1960s, the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
      
      
        Author: Senator Marshall
      
    
