
      
        BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF DELAWARE (Three-fifths of all members elected to each house thereof concurring therein):
      
      
        Section 1.  Amend Title 21 §2140A of the Delaware Code by making deletions as shown by strike through and insertions as shown by underline as follows:
      
      
        § 2140A Environmental license plates.
      
      
        (a) The owner of a motor vehicle may apply to the Division of Motor Vehicles for a special environmental license plate.
      
      
        (b) Upon the initial application for a plate to be issued pursuant to this section, a 1-time fee of 
        $35
         
        $50
        , which includes an administrative fee of $15, is required in addition to the annual registration fee required by this title. This additional fee is required for members of nonprofit organizations even if members are exempt from registration fees under § 2159 of this title. A replacement plate may be obtained upon payment of a fee to be set by the Division which shall cover the cost of the plate.
      
      
        (c) The 1-time administrative fee collected pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall be deposited into a special fund and used by the Division of Motor Vehicles for the purpose of promoting the sale of the plate and administering this section. Proceeds remaining after the Division of Motor Vehicles has covered the costs of promoting and administering this section shall be applied pursuant to subsection (e) of this section.
      
      
        (d) 
        All registration plates issued pursuant to this section shall be of the colors and design as determined by the Committee.
         The numbers and/or letters assigned will be the same as the current license plate assigned to the vehicle. No special numbers or letters will be authorized for these plates. The 
        Committee
         
        Division of Motor Vehicles 
        may at its discretion drop the wording "The First State" and substitute in place thereof an environmental slogan. The Division of Motor Vehicles shall have the power to refuse any design which it believes would cause a public safety enforcement problem.
      
      
        (e) The funds derived by the State from that portion of the 1-time fee of 
        $35
         
        $50 
        that is not defined as an administrative fee pursuant to subsection (c) of this section shall be deposited by the Division of Motor Vehicles with the State Treasurer and shall be specifically set aside and divided equally between:
      
      
        (1) The Delaware Center for the Inland Bays; and
      
      
        (2) The Partnership for the Delaware Estuary, Incorporated.
      
      
        (f) The Division of Motor Vehicles may promulgate rules and regulations as required to administer this section.
      
      
         
      
    

      
        SYNOPSIS
      
      
        This bill increases the 1-time fee from $35 to $50 for Delaware’s environmental license plates in order to increase revenue to improve the capacity of the Delaware Center for the Inland Bays and The Partnership for the Delaware Estuary to fulfill their responsibilities to the protection and restoration of Delaware’s estuaries.
      
      
         
      
    
