
      
        WHEREAS, it is necessary to ensure that veterans have equal access to higher education in the State of Delaware; and
      
      
        WHEREAS, according to the Delaware Commission of Veterans Affairs 2016 Annual Report, Delaware has 76,586 veterans; and
      
      
        WHEREAS, veterans face multiple obstacles in their ability to pursue higher education; and 
      
      
        WHEREAS, the State of Delaware has a duty to its veterans to ensure that colleges and universities understand these obstacles and develop policies to overcome them;
      
      
        NOW, THEREFORE:
      
      
        BE IT RESOLVED by the Senate of the 149
        
          th
        
         General Assembly of the State of Delaware, the House of Representatives concurring therein, that the Veterans Higher Education Task Force (Task Force) be established to study and make findings and recommendations regarding veterans’ access to higher education in Delaware. 
      
      
        BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the Task Force shall be composed of the following members or a designee appointed by the member serving by virtue of position:
      
      
        (1) Colonel Angela F. Showell.
      
      
        (2) One member of the Senate, appointed by the President Pro-Tempore of the Senate.
      
      
         (3) One member of the House of Representatives, appointed by the Speaker of the House.
      
      
        (4) The President of Delaware State University.
      
      
        (5) The President of the University of Delaware.
      
      
        (6) The President of Wesley College.
      
      
        (7) The President of Delaware Technical and Community College.
      
      
        (8) The President of Wilmington University.
      
      
        (9) The President of Goldey-Beacom College.
      
      
        (10) A Peer Evaluator from Middle States Commission on Higher Education. 
      
      
        BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the Task Force may request the participation of guests and speakers knowledgeable in the issues under study.
      
      
        BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that all meetings of the Task Force, unless otherwise prohibited by existing law, must be open to the public with notice of the meetings posted in advance and communicated to the media.
      
      
        BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the Task Force shall hold its first meeting no later than August 31, 2017 and its second meeting no later than 6 months after the first meeting.
      
      
        BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the Task Force shall develop a report encapsulating its findings and recommendations for action and deliver the report to the President Pro Tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives for distribution to all members of the General Assembly, with a copy to the Governor and to the Director and the librarian of the Division of Research of Legislative Council and to the Delaware Public Archives, no later than May 1, 2018.
      
      
        BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the Senate is responsible for providing reasonable and necessary support staff and materials for the Task Force.
      
      
        BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the chair of the Task Force be Colonel Angela F. Showell. 
      
      
        BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the chair of the Task Force be responsible for guiding the administration of the Task Force by, at minimum, doing all of the following:
      
      
        (1) Setting a date, time, and place for the initial organizational meeting.
      
      
        (2) Supervising the preparation and distribution of meeting notices, agendas, minutes, correspondence, and reports of the Task Force.
      
      
        (3) Sending, after the first meeting of the Task Force, a list of the members of the Task Force and the person who appointed them to the President Pro Tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives and to the Director of the Division of Research of Legislative Council.
      
      
        (4) Providing meeting notices, agendas, and minutes to the Director of the Division of Research of Legislative Council.
      
      
        (5) Ensuring that the final report of the Task Force is submitted to the President Pro Tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives for distribution to all members of the General Assembly, with a copy to the Governor and to the Director and the librarian of the Division of Research of Legislative Council and to the Delaware Public Archives.
      
      
        BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED:
      
      
        (1) Official action by the Task Force, including making findings and recommendations, requires the approval of a majority of the members of the Task Force.
      
      
        (2) The Task Force may adopt rules necessary for its operation.
      
      
         
      
    

      
        SYNOPSIS
      
      
        This concurrent resolution establishes the Veterans Higher Education Task Force to study and make findings and recommendations regarding veterans’ access to higher education in Delaware.
      
      
        Author: Senator Delcollo
      
    
