CS FOR HOUSE BILL NO. 172(JUD)                                                                    
"An Act relating to the regulation and production of industrial hemp; relating to                                       
industrial hemp pilot programs; providing that industrial hemp is not included in the                                   
definition of 'marijuana'; and clarifying that adding industrial hemp to food does not                                  
create an adulterated food product."                                                                                    
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF ALASKA:                                                                
* Section 1. AS 03.05 is amended by adding new sections to read:                                                   
Sec. 03.05.078. Industrial hemp. (a) Industrial hemp is an agricultural crop in                            
the state.                                                                                                        
(b)  An individual registered under this section may produce industrial hemp,                                
including growing, harvesting, possessing, transporting, processing, selling, or buying                           
industrial hemp.                                                                                                  
(c)  An individual who produces industrial hemp shall apply to the department                                
for registration on a form prescribed by the department that includes                                             
(1)  the name and address of the applicant;                                                             
(2)  the address and global positioning system coordinates of the area to                                               
be used for the production of industrial hemp.                                                                    
(d)  Registration under this section is valid for one year. The department may                                          
not limit the number of registrants. A registrant may renew registration in the form and                                
manner prescribed by the department.                                                                              
(e)  The department shall establish fee levels for application, registration, and                                       
renewal of registration so that the total amount of fees collected under this section                                   
approximately equals the regulatory costs for regulating the industrial hemp industry.                                  
The department shall annually review each fee level to determine whether the                                            
regulatory cost of industrial hemp is approximately equal to the fees collected.                                  
(f)  The department may issue a stop-sale order or issue a violation notice to a                                        
person who is producing industrial hemp without a current registration.                                           
(g)  A registrant may use any propagation method, including planting seeds or                                           
starts or using clones or cuttings to produce industrial hemp.                                                    
(h)  The department, a registrant, or any institution of higher education may                                           
import into the state and resell industrial hemp seeds.                                                           
(i)  A registrant may retain industrial hemp seeds for the purpose of                                                   
propagating industrial hemp in future years.                                                                      
(j)  A registrant may retain and recondition any industrial hemp that tests                                             
between 0.3 percent and one percent delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol on a dry-weight                                        
basis. Industrial hemp products intended for human consumption may not exceed 0.3                                       
percent delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol.                                                                             
(k)  The department may adopt regulations regarding approved shipping                                                   
documentation for the transportation of industrial hemp.                                                          
(l)  A registrant shall maintain for at least three years following the sale or                                         
transfer of industrial hemp records showing                                                                       
(1)  the name and address of the person that received the industrial                                                    
hemp;                                                                                                             
(2)  the amount of industrial hemp transferred.                                                         
(m)  A registrant shall make the records required under (l) of this section                                             
available for inspection by the department during normal business hours. The                                            
department shall provide at least three days' notice before inspecting the records.                               
Sec. 03.05.079. Industrial hemp pilot program. (a) The department or an                                    
institution of higher education in the state may create and administer an agricultural                            
pilot program to study the growth, cultivation, or marketing of industrial hemp.                                  
(b)  An institution of higher education in the state, the division of the                                               
department with responsibility for agriculture, or a person registered under                                            
AS 03.05.078 may participate in an agricultural pilot program created under (a) of this                                 
section or engage in industrial hemp research.                                                                    
(c)  The department may adopt regulations to implement this section.                                         
* Sec. 2. AS 03.05.100 is amended by adding a new paragraph to read:                                               
(5)  "industrial hemp" means all parts and varieties of the plant                                                       
Cannabis sativa L. containing not more than 0.3 percent delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol.                             
* Sec. 3. AS 11.71.900(14) is amended to read:                                                                     
(14)  "marijuana" means the seeds, and leaves, buds, and flowers of the                                                 
plant (genus) Cannabis, whether growing or not; it does not include the resin or oil                                    
extracted from any part of the plants, or any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,                                  
mixture, or preparation from the resin or oil, including hashish, hashish oil, and natural                              
or synthetic tetrahydrocannabinol; it does not include the stalks of the plant, fiber                                   
produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other                                       
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the stalks, fiber,                                  
oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination; it                              
does not include industrial hemp as defined in AS 03.05.100;                                                  
* Sec. 4. AS 17.20.020 is amended by adding a new subsection to read:                                              
(e)  Food is not adulterated under this section solely because it contains                                              
industrial hemp, as defined in AS 03.05.100, or an industrial hemp product.                                       
* Sec. 5. AS 17.38.900(10) is amended to read:                                                                     
(10)  "marijuana" means all parts of the plant of the genus cannabis                                                    
whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the                                     
plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of                                    
the plant, its seeds, or its resin, including marijuana concentrate; "marijuana" does not                               
include fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant,                                  
sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination, [OR] the weight of any                            
other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations,                              
food, drink, or other products, or industrial hemp as defined in AS 03.05.100;                                