HOUSE BILL NO. 353                                                                          
"An Act relating to the licensure of marital and family therapists; relating to medical                                 
assistance for marital and family therapists' services; and providing for an effective                                  
date."                                                                                                                  
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF ALASKA:                                                                
* Section 1. AS 08.63.100(a) is amended to read:                                                                   
(a)  The board shall issue a license to practice marital and family therapy to a                             
person who                                                                                                        
(1)  applies on a form provided by the board;                                                           
(2)  pays the fee established under AS 08.01.065;                                                       
(3)  furnishes evidence satisfactory to the board that the person                                       
(A)  has not engaged in conduct that is a ground for imposing                                      
disciplinary sanctions under AS 08.63.210;                                                                   
(B)  holds a master's degree or doctorate in marital and family                                    
therapy or allied mental health field from a regionally accredited educational                               
institution approved by the board for which the person completed a course of                                 
study that included instruction substantially equivalent to the following:                                   
(i)  three courses or nine semester or 12 quarter hours of                                    
course work in marital and family therapy;                                                              
(ii)  three courses or nine semester or 12 quarter hours of                                   
course work in marital and family studies;                                                              
(iii)  three courses or nine semester or 12 quarter hours                                     
of course work in human development;                                                                    
(iv)  one course or three semester or four quarter hours                                      
of course work in professional studies or professional ethics and law;                                  
(v)  one course or three semester or four quarter hours of                                                              
course work in research; and                                                                            
(vi)  one year of supervised clinical practice in marital                                                               
and family therapy;                                                                                     
(C)  after receiving a degree described in (B) of this paragraph,                                                       
has                                                                                                          
[(i)]  practiced supervised marital and family therapy,                                                             
including 1,500 hours of [DIRECT] clinical contact with couples,                                                        
individuals, and families; the 1,500 hours of [AND                                                  
(ii)  BEEN SUPERVISED IN THE] clinical contact                                                                          
must include [FOR] at least [200 HOURS, INCLUDING] 100 hours                                                        
of individual supervision and 100 hours of group supervision approved                                                   
by the board; the 100 hours of individual supervision and 100 hours                                                 
of group supervision may be conducted by one or more                                                                
supervisors;                                                                                        
(D)  has received training related to domestic violence; and                                       
(E)  has passed a written or oral examination administered by                                                           
the board.                                                                                                 
* Sec. 2. AS 08.63.120(b) is amended to read:                                                                      
(b)  A person who supervises a licensee under this section during                                        
(1)  individual supervision must                                                                    
(A) [(1)]  have practiced marital and family therapy for five                                  
years;                                                                                                       
(B) [(2)]  be licensed under this chapter; and                                                 
(C) [(3)]  meet the minimum standards established by the board                                 
for approved supervisors; or                                                                             
(2)  group supervision must be licensed to practice as a                                            
(A)  professional counselor under AS 08.29;                                                    
(B)  marital and family therapist under AS 08.63;                                              
(C)  physician under AS 08.64 who is licensed by the State                                     
Medical Board as a psychiatrist;                                                                         
(D)  advanced practice registered nurse under AS 08.68 who                                                          
is authorized by the Board of Nursing to practice as an adult or family                                             
psychiatric mental health nurse practitioner;                                                            
(E)  psychologist under AS 08.86; or                                                           
(F)  clinical social worker under AS 08.95.                                                    
* Sec. 3. AS 47.07.030(b) is amended to read:                                                                      
(b)  In addition to the mandatory services specified in (a) of this section and the                                     
services provided under (d) of this section, the department may offer only the                                          
following optional services: case management services for traumatic or acquired brain                                   
injury; case management and nutrition services for pregnant women; personal care                                        
services in a recipient's home; emergency hospital services; long-term care                                             
noninstitutional services; medical supplies and equipment; advanced practice                                            
registered nurse services; clinic services; rehabilitative services for children eligible                               
for services under AS 47.07.063, substance abusers, and emotionally disturbed or                                        
chronically mentally ill adults; targeted case management services; inpatient                                           
psychiatric facility services for individuals 65 years of age or older and individuals                                  
under 21 years of age; psychologists' services; clinical social workers' services;                                      
marital and family therapists' services; midwife services; prescribed drugs; physical                               
therapy; occupational therapy; chiropractic services; low-dose mammography                                              
screening, as defined in AS 21.42.375(e); hospice care; treatment of speech, hearing,                                   
and language disorders; adult dental services; prosthetic devices and eyeglasses;                                       
optometrists' services; intermediate care facility services, including intermediate care                                
facility services for persons with intellectual and developmental disabilities; skilled                                 
nursing facility services for individuals under 21 years of age; and reasonable                                         
transportation to and from the point of medical care.                                                             
* Sec. 4. AS 47.07.030(g) is amended by adding new paragraphs to read:                                             
(4)  "direct supervision" means that one or more psychiatrists are on the                               
premises of a mental health physician clinic to provide services relating to mental                               
health at least 30 percent of the time that the clinic is open to provide those services;                         
(5)  "mental health physician clinic" means a clinic that                                               
(A)  is operated by one or more psychiatrists; and                                                 
(B)  primarily provides clinic services relating to mental health;                                 
(6)  "psychiatrist" means a person licensed to practice as a physician                                  
under AS 08.64 who is licensed by the State Medical Board as a psychiatrist.                                      
* Sec. 5. AS 47.07.030 is amended by adding a new subsection to read:                                              
(h)  The department may reimburse a mental health physician clinic for clinic                                
services under (b) of this section if the services are provided by                                                
(1)  a psychiatrist; or                                                                                 
(2)  an individual who                                                                                  
(A)  works under the direct supervision of a psychiatrist; and                                     
(B)  is licensed to practice as                                                                    
(i)  a professional counselor under AS 08.29;                                                 
(ii)  a marital and family therapist under AS 08.63;                                          
(iii)  a physician assistant under AS 08.64;                                                  
(iv)  an advanced nurse practitioner under AS 08.68 who                                       
is authorized by the Board of Nursing to practice as an adult or family                                 
psychiatric mental health nurse practitioner;                                                           
(v)  a psychologist under AS 08.86;                                                           
(vi)  a psychological associate under AS 08.86; or                                            
(vii)  a clinical social worker under AS 08.95.                                               
* Sec. 6. The uncodified law of the State of Alaska is amended by adding a new section to                          
read:                                                                                                                   
TRANSITION: REGULATIONS. The Department of Health and Social Services and                                               
the Board of Marital and Family Therapy may adopt regulations necessary to implement the                                
changes made by this Act. The regulations take effect under AS 44.62 (Administrative                                    
Procedure Act), but not before the effective date of the law implemented by the regulation.                             
* Sec. 7. Section 6 of this Act takes effect immediately under AS 01.10.070(c).                                    
* Sec. 8. Except as provided in sec. 7 of this Act, this Act takes effect January 1, 2019.                         