CS FOR HOUSE BILL NO. 110(L&C)                                                                    
"An Act relating to the Board of Massage Therapists; relating to the practice of massage                                
therapy; relating to massage therapy establishments; relating to the Department of                                      
Commerce, Community, and Economic Development; and providing for an effective                                           
date."                                                                                                                  
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF ALASKA:                                                                
* Section 1. AS 08.61.010 is amended to read:                                                                      
Sec. 08.61.010. Board established. The Board of Massage Therapists is                                      
established in the department. The board consists of five members appointed by the                                
governor as follows:                                                                                              
(1)  four licensed massage therapists who have been engaged in the                                                      
practice of massage therapy in the state for the three years immediately preceding                                      
appointment and who shall remain actively engaged in the practice of massage therapy                                    
while serving on the board; not more than one member appointed under this paragraph                                     
may have an ownership or partnership interest in a massage school; and                                            
(2)  one public member; the governor may not appoint as a public                                        
member                                                                                                            
(A)  a licensed health care provider;                                                              
(B)  an employee of the state; or                                                                  
(C)  a current [OR FORMER] member of another occupational                                          
licensing board established under AS 08.                                                                     
* Sec. 2. AS 08.61.020 is amended to read:                                                                         
Sec. 08.61.020. Duties and powers of board. In addition to the duties                                      
specified in AS 08.01, the board shall                                                                            
(1)  provide for the examination of applicants by the board or through a                                                
nationally recognized competency examination approved by the board and issue                                            
licenses to applicants the board finds qualified;                                                                 
(2)  adopt regulations governing                                                                        
(A)  licensing of massage therapists; [AND]                                                        
(B)  the practice of massage therapy; and                                                      
(C)  massage therapy establishments;                                                           
(3)  establish standards of professional competence and ethical conduct                                                 
for massage therapists;                                                                                           
(4)  establish standards for continuing education for massage therapists;                                               
standards adopted by the board under this paragraph must allow for approval of                                          
Internet-based continuing education courses;                                                                      
(5)  make available to the public a list of massage therapists licensed                                                 
under this chapter;                                                                                               
(6)  determine which states have educational and licensing                                                              
requirements equivalent to the requirements of this state;                                                        
(7)  enforce the provisions of this chapter and adopt and enforce                                                       
regulations necessary to implement this chapter; and                                                              
(8)  approve one or more nationally recognized competency                                                               
examinations and publish and periodically update the list of approved examinations.                               
* Sec. 3. AS 08.61.030 is amended to read:                                                                         
Sec. 08.61.030. Qualifications for license. The board shall issue a license to                                        
practice massage therapy to a person who                                                                          
(1)  applies on a form provided by the department;                                                      
(2)  pays the fees established under AS 08.61.090;                                                      
(3)  furnishes evidence satisfactory to the board that the person has                                   
completed a                                                                                                       
(A)  course of study of at least 625 [500] hours of in-class                                   
supervised instruction and clinical work from an approved massage school; or                                 
(B)  board-approved apprenticeship program;                                                        
(4)  is 18 years of age or older;                                                                       
(5)  has been fingerprinted and has provided the fees required by the                                                   
Department of Public Safety under AS 12.62.160 for criminal justice information and                                     
a national criminal history record check; the fingerprints and fees shall be forwarded                                  
to the Department of Public Safety to obtain a report of criminal justice information                                   
under AS 12.62 and a national criminal history record check under AS 12.62.400;                                   
(6)  has a current cardiopulmonary resuscitation certification;                                         
(7)  has received at least two [FOUR] hours of safety education                                                     
covering bloodborne pathogens and universal precautions in the two years preceding                                      
the application for the license; in this paragraph, "bloodborne pathogens" has the                                      
meaning given in AS 18.15.450;                                                                                    
(8)  has successfully completed a nationally recognized competency                                                      
examination approved by the board; and                                                                            
(9)  has not been convicted of, or pled guilty or no contest to, a crime                                                
involving moral turpitude, or who has been convicted of, or pled guilty or no contest                                   
to, a crime involving moral turpitude if the board finds that the conviction does not                                   
affect the person's ability to practice competently and safely.                                                   
* Sec. 4. AS 08.61.050 is amended to read:                                                                         
Sec. 08.61.050. Standards for license renewal. The board shall renew a                                                
license issued under this chapter to a licensee who                                                               
(1)  pays the required fee;                                                                             
(2)  meets the continuing education requirements established by the                                                     
board;                                                                                                            
(3)  has not been convicted of, or pled guilty or no contest to, a crime                                                
involving moral turpitude, or has been convicted of, or pled guilty to or no contest to,                                
a crime involving moral turpitude if the board finds that the conviction does not affect                                
the person's ability to practice competently and safely;                                                          
(4)  has a current cardiopulmonary resuscitation certification; and                                     
(5)  has been fingerprinted and has provided the fees required by the                                                   
Department of Public Safety under AS 12.62.160 for criminal justice information and                                     
a national criminal history record check at least once every six years; the fingerprints                            
and fees shall be forwarded to the Department of Public Safety to obtain a report of                                    
criminal justice information under AS 12.62 and a national criminal history record                                
check under AS 12.62.400.                                                                                         
* Sec. 5. The uncodified law of the State of Alaska is amended by adding a new section to                          
read:                                                                                                                   
TRANSITION: REGULATIONS. The Department of Commerce, Community, and                                                     
Economic Development and the Board of Massage Therapists may adopt regulations                                          
necessary to implement the changes made by this Act. The regulations take effect under                                  
AS 44.62 (Administrative Procedure Act), but not before the effective date of the law                                   
implemented by the regulation.                                                                                          
* Sec. 6. Sections 4 and 5 of this Act take effect immediately under AS 01.10.070(c).                              
* Sec. 7. Except as provided in sec. 6 of this Act, this Act takes effect July 1, 2019.                            