SPONSOR SUBSTITUTE FOR HOUSE BILL NO. 46                                                               
"An Act relating to the state and municipal procurement preferences for agricultural                                    
products harvested in the state and fisheries products harvested or processed in the                                    
state; relating to merchandise sold and certain fees charged or collected by the                                        
Department of Natural Resources; and providing for an effective date."                                                  
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF ALASKA:                                                                
* Section 1. AS 03.05.010 is amended by adding a new subsection to read:                                           
(c)  The commissioner of natural resources may sell promotional merchandise                                             
related to the "Alaska Grown" trademark and may charge or collect a fee for the sale                                    
of promotional merchandise related to the "Alaska Grown" trademark. The                                                 
commissioner may issue a license and charge a license fee for the sale of promotional                                   
merchandise related to the "Alaska Grown" trademark. The commissioner shall price                                       
merchandise sold by the commissioner under this subsection in a manner that ensures                                     
a reasonable monetary return to the state. To the extent practicable, the commissioner                                  
shall sell only merchandise produced or manufactured, including printing, screen                                        
printing, and embroidery, in the United States that, subject to AS 36.30, is procured                             
from either an Alaska bidder or a person that employs prisoners under                                             
AS 33.30.191(b).                                                                                                  
* Sec. 2. AS 29.71.040(a) is amended to read:                                                                      
(a)  When agricultural products are purchased by a municipality that receives                                           
state money, only agricultural products harvested in the state shall be purchased                                       
whenever priced not [NO] more than 15 [SEVEN] percent above products harvested                                  
outside the state, available, and of like quality compared with agricultural products                                   
harvested outside the state.                                                                                      
* Sec. 3. AS 29.71.040(b) is amended to read:                                                                      
(b)  When fisheries products are purchased by a municipality that receives state                                        
money, only fisheries products harvested or processed within the jurisdiction of the                                    
state shall be purchased whenever priced not [NO] more than 15 [SEVEN] percent                                  
above products harvested or processed outside the jurisdiction of the state, available,                                 
and of like quality compared with fisheries products harvested or processed outside                                     
the jurisdiction of the state.                                                                                    
* Sec. 4. AS 36.15.050(a) is amended to read:                                                                      
(a)  When agricultural products are purchased by the state or by a school                                               
district that receives state money, a 15 [SEVEN] percent preference shall be applied to                             
the price of the products harvested in the state.                                                                 
* Sec. 5. AS 36.15.050(b) is amended to read:                                                                      
(b)  When fisheries products are purchased by the state or by a school district                                         
that receives state money, a 15 [SEVEN] percent preference shall be applied to the                                  
price of the products harvested or processed within the jurisdiction of the state.                                
* Sec. 6. AS 37.05.146(c) is amended by adding a new paragraph to read:                                            
(90)  fees collected by the Department of Natural Resources under                                                       
AS 03.05.010(c).                                                                                                  
* Sec. 7. This Act takes effect July 1, 2018.                                                                      