CS FOR HOUSE BILL NO. 159(HSS)                                                                    
"An Act relating to the prescription of opioids; relating to voluntary nonopioid                                        
directives; relating to the controlled substance prescription database; relating to the                                 
practice of dentistry; relating to the practice of pharmacy; relating to the practice of                                
medicine; relating to the practice of podiatry; relating to the practice of osteopathy;                                 
relating to the practice of nursing; relating to the practice of optometry; relating to the                             
practice of veterinary medicine; relating to the duties of the Board of Pharmacy;                                       
relating to pharmacists; providing for an effective date by repealing the effective date of                             
sec. 73, ch. 25, SLA 2016; and providing for an effective date."                                                        
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF ALASKA:                                                                
* Section 1. AS 08.36.070(a), as amended by sec. 5, ch. 25, SLA 2016, is amended to read:                          
(a)  The board shall                                                                                         
(1)  provide for the examination of applicants and the credentialing,                                   
registration, and licensure of those applicants it finds qualified;                                               
(2)  maintain a registry of licensed dentists, licensed dental hygienists,                              
and registered dental assistants who are in good standing;                                                        
(3)  affiliate with the American Association of Dental Boards and pay                                   
annual dues to the association;                                                                                   
(4)  hold hearings and order the disciplinary sanction of a person who                                  
violates this chapter, AS 08.32, or a regulation of the board;                                                    
(5)  supply forms for applications, licenses, permits, certificates,                                    
registration documents, and other papers and records;                                                             
(6)  enforce the provisions of this chapter and AS 08.32 and adopt or                                                   
amend the regulations necessary to make the provisions of this chapter and AS 08.32                                     
effective;                                                                                                        
(7)  adopt regulations ensuring that renewal of a license, registration, or                                             
certificate under this chapter or a license, certificate, or endorsement under AS 08.32                                 
is contingent on [UPON] proof of continued professional competence; the                                         
regulations must require that a licensee receive not less than two hours of                                         
education in pain management and opioid use and addiction in the two years                                          
preceding an application for renewal of a license, unless the licensee has                                          
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the board that the licensee does not currently                                  
hold a valid federal Drug Enforcement Administration registration number;                                     
(8)  at least annually, cause to be published on the Internet and in a                                                  
newspaper of general circulation in each major city in the state a summary of                                           
disciplinary actions the board has taken during the preceding calendar year;                                      
(9)  issue permits or certificates to licensed dentists, licensed dental                                                
hygienists, and dental assistants who meet standards determined by the board for                                        
specific procedures that require specific education and training;                                                 
(10)  require that a licensed dentist who has a federal Drug                                                            
Enforcement Administration registration number register with the controlled substance                                   
prescription database under AS 17.30.200(o).                                                                      
* Sec. 2. AS 08.36.110(a) is amended to read:                                                                      
(a)  An applicant for a license to practice dentistry shall                                                  
(1)  provide certification to the board that the applicant                                              
(A)  is a graduate of a dental school that, at the time of                                         
graduation, is approved by the board;                                                                        
(B)  has successfully passed a written examination approved by                                     
the board;                                                                                                   
(C)  has not had a license to practice dentistry revoked,                                          
suspended, or voluntarily surrendered in this state or another state;                                        
(D)  is not the subject of an adverse decision based on [UPON]                                 
a complaint, investigation, review procedure, or other disciplinary proceeding                               
within the five years immediately preceding application, or of an unresolved                                            
complaint, investigation, review procedure, or other disciplinary proceeding,                                           
undertaken by a state, territorial, local, or federal dental licensing jurisdiction;                         
(E)  is not the subject of an unresolved or an adverse decision                                                         
based on [UPON] a complaint, investigation, review procedure, or other                                              
disciplinary proceeding, undertaken by a state, territorial, local, or federal                                          
dental licensing jurisdiction or law enforcement agency that relates to criminal                                        
or fraudulent activity, dental malpractice, or negligent dental care and that                                           
adversely reflects on the applicant's ability or competence to practice dentistry                                       
or on the safety or well-being of patients;                                                                  
(F)  is not the subject of an adverse report from the National                                                          
Practitioner Data Bank or the American Association of Dental Boards                                                     
Clearinghouse for Board Actions that relates to criminal or fraudulent activity,                                        
or dental malpractice;                                                                                       
(G)  is not impaired to an extent that affects the applicant's                                                          
ability to practice dentistry;                                                                               
(H)  has not been convicted of a crime that adversely reflects on                                                       
the applicant's ability or competency to practice dentistry or that jeopardizes                                         
the safety or well-being of a patient;                                                                       
(2)  pass, to the satisfaction of the board, written, clinical, and other                                               
examinations administered or approved by the board; and                                                           
(3)  meet the other qualifications for a license established by the board                                               
by regulation, including education in pain management and opioid use and                                            
addiction in the two years preceding the application for a license, unless the                                      
applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the board that the applicant                                      
does not currently hold a valid federal Drug Enforcement Administration                                             
registration number; approved education may include dental school coursework.                                       
* Sec. 3. AS 08.36.315 is amended to read:                                                                         
Sec. 08.36.315. Grounds for discipline, suspension, or revocation of license.                              
The board may revoke or suspend the license of a dentist, or may reprimand, censure,                              
or discipline a dentist, or both, if the board finds, after a hearing, that the dentist                   
(1)  used or knowingly cooperated in deceit, fraud, or intentional                                                      
misrepresentation to obtain a license;                                                                            
(2)  engaged in deceit, fraud, or intentional misrepresentation in the                                                  
course of providing or billing for professional dental services or engaging in                                          
professional activities;                                                                                          
(3)  advertised professional dental services in a false or misleading                                                   
manner;                                                                                                           
(4)  received compensation for referring a person to another dentist or                                                 
dental practice;                                                                                                  
(5)  has been convicted of a felony or other crime that affects the                                                     
dentist's ability to continue to practice dentistry competently and safely;                                       
(6)  engaged in the performance of patient care, or permitted the                                                       
performance of patient care by persons under the dentist's supervision, regardless of                                   
whether actual injury to the patient occurred,                                                                    
(A)  that did not conform to minimum professional standards of                                                          
dentistry; or                                                                                                
(B)  when the dentist, or a person under the supervision of the                                                         
dentist, did not have the permit, registration, or certificate required under                                           
AS 08.32 or this chapter;                                                                                    
(7)  failed to comply with this chapter, with a regulation adopted under                                                
this chapter, or with an order of the board;                                                                      
(8)  continued to practice after becoming unfit due to                                                  
(A)  professional incompetence;                                                                    
(B)  addiction or dependence on alcohol or other drugs that                                        
impair the dentist's ability to practice safely;                                                             
(C)  physical or mental disability;                                                                
(9)  engaged in lewd or immoral conduct in connection with the                                          
delivery of professional service to patients;                                                                     
(10)  permitted a dental hygienist or dental assistant who is employed                                  
by the dentist or working under the dentist's supervision to perform a dental procedure                           
in violation of AS 08.32.110 or AS 08.36.346;                                                                     
(11)  failed to report to the board a death that occurred on the premises                                               
used for the practice of dentistry within 48 hours;                                                               
(12)  falsified or destroyed patient or facility records or failed to                                                   
maintain a patient or facility record for at least seven years after the date the record                                
was created;                                                                                                  
(13)  prescribed or dispensed an opioid in excess of the maximum                                                    
dosage authorized under AS 08.36.355; or                                                                      
(14)  procured, sold, prescribed, or dispensed drugs in violation of                                                
a law, regardless of whether there has been a criminal action or harm to the                                        
patient.                                                                                                      
* Sec. 4. AS 08.36 is amended by adding a new section to read:                                                     
Sec. 08.36.355. Maximum dosage for opioid prescriptions. (a) A licensee                                               
may not issue                                                                                                     
(1)  an initial prescription for an opioid that exceeds a seven-day supply                                              
to an adult patient for outpatient use;                                                                           
(2)  a prescription for an opioid that exceeds a seven-day supply to a                                                  
minor; at the time a licensee writes a prescription for an opioid for a minor, the                                      
licensee shall discuss with the parent or guardian of the minor why the prescription is                                 
necessary and the risks associated with opioid use.                                                               
(b)  Notwithstanding (a) of this section, a licensee may issue a prescription for                                       
an opioid that exceeds a seven-day supply to an adult or minor patient if, in the                                       
professional judgment of the licensee, more than a seven-day supply of an opioid is                                     
necessary for                                                                                                     
(1)  the patient's chronic pain management; the licensee may write a                                                    
prescription for an opioid for the quantity needed to treat the patient's medical                                       
condition or chronic pain; the licensee shall document in the patient's medical record                                  
the condition triggering the prescription of an opioid in a quantity that exceeds a                                     
seven-day supply and indicate that a nonopioid alternative was not appropriate to                                       
address the medical condition; or                                                                                 
(2)  a patient who is unable to access a practitioner within the time                                                   
necessary for a refill of the seven-day supply because of a logistical or travel barrier;                               
the licensee may write a prescription for an opioid for the quantity needed to treat the                                
patient for the time that the patient is unable to access a practitioner; the licensee shall                            
document in the patient's medical record the reason for the prescription of an opioid in                                
a quantity that exceeds a seven-day supply and indicate that a nonopioid alternative                                    
was not appropriate to address the medical condition; in this paragraph, "practitioner"                                 
has the meaning given in AS 11.71.900.                                                                            
(c)  In this section,                                                                                        
(1)  "adult" means                                                                                      
(A)  a individual who has reached 18 years of age; or                                              
(B)  an emancipated minor;                                                                         
(2)  "emancipated minor" means a minor whose disabilities have been                                                     
removed for general purposes under AS 09.55.590;                                                                  
(3)  "minor" means an individual under 18 years of age who is not an                                                    
emancipated minor.                                                                                                
* Sec. 5. AS 08.36.370 is amended by adding a new paragraph to read:                                               
(10)  "opioid" includes the opium and opiate substances and opium and                                                   
opiate derivatives listed in AS 11.71.140.                                                                        
* Sec. 6. AS 08.64.107 is amended to read:                                                                         
Sec. 08.64.107. Regulation of physician assistants and intensive care                                                 
paramedics. The board shall adopt regulations regarding the licensure of physician                                    
assistants and registration of mobile intensive care paramedics, and the medical                                        
services that they may perform, including the                                                                     
(1)  educational and other qualifications, including education in pain                              
management and opioid use and addiction;                                                                      
(2)  application and registration procedures;                                                           
(3)  scope of activities authorized; and                                                                
(4)  responsibilities of the supervising or training physician.                                         
* Sec. 7. AS 08.64.200(a) is amended to read:                                                                      
(a)  Except for foreign medical graduates as specified in AS 08.64.225, each                                 
physician applicant shall                                                                                         
(1)  submit a certificate of graduation from a legally chartered medical                                
school accredited by the Association of American Medical Colleges and the Council                                       
on Medical Education of the American Medical Association;                                                         
(2)  submit a certificate from a recognized hospital or hospitals                                                       
certifying that the applicant has satisfactorily performed the duties of resident                                       
physician or intern for a period of                                                                               
(A)  one year if the applicant graduated from medical school                                                            
before January 1, 1995, as evidenced by a certificate of completion of the first                                        
year of postgraduate training from the facility where the applicant completed                                           
the first year of internship or residency; and                                                               
(B)  two years if the applicant graduated from medical school                                                           
on or after January 1, 1995, as evidenced by a certificate of completion of the                                         
first year of postgraduate training from the facility where the applicant                                               
completed the first year of internship or residency and a certificate of                                                
successful completion of one additional year of postgraduate training at a                                              
recognized hospital;                                                                                         
(3)  submit a list of negotiated settlements or judgments in claims or                                                  
civil actions alleging medical malpractice against the applicant, including an                                          
explanation of the basis for each claim or action; [AND]                                                          
(4)  not have a license to practice medicine in another state, country,                                                 
province, or territory that is currently suspended or revoked for disciplinary reasons;                             
and                                                                                                           
(5)  receive education in pain management and opioid use and                                                        
addiction, unless the applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the board                                   
that the applicant does not currently hold a valid federal Drug Enforcement                                         
Administration registration number; an applicant may include past professional                                      
experience or professional education as proof of professional competence.                                     
* Sec. 8. AS 08.64.205 is amended to read:                                                                         
Sec. 08.64.205. Qualifications for osteopath applicants. Each osteopath                                    
applicant shall meet the qualifications prescribed in AS 08.64.200(a)(3) - (5)                                
[AS 08.64.200(a)(3) AND (4)] and shall                                                                            
(1)  submit a certificate of graduation from the legally chartered school                               
of osteopathy approved by the board;                                                                              
(2)  submit a certificate from a hospital approved by the American                                                      
Medical Association or the American Osteopathic Association that certifies that the                                     
osteopath has satisfactorily completed and performed the duties of intern or resident                                   
physician for                                                                                                     
(A)  one year if the applicant graduated from a school of                                                               
osteopathy before January 1, 1995, as evidenced by a certificate of completion                                          
of the first year of postgraduate training from the facility where the applicant                                        
completed the first year of internship or residency; or                                                      
(B)  two years if the applicant graduated from a school of                                                              
osteopathy on or after January 1, 1995, as evidenced by a certificate of                                                
completion of the first year of postgraduate training from the facility where the                                       
applicant completed the first year of internship or residency and a certificate of                                      
successful completion of one additional year of postgraduate training at a                                              
recognized hospital;                                                                                         
(3)  take the examination required by AS 08.64.210 or be certified to                                                   
practice by the National Board of Examiners for Osteopathic Physicians and                                              
Surgeons;                                                                                                     
(4)  receive education in pain management and opioid use and                                                        
addiction, unless the applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the board                                   
that the applicant does not currently hold a valid federal Drug Enforcement                                         
Administration registration number; an applicant may include past professional                                      
experience or professional education as proof of professional competence.                                     
* Sec. 9. AS 08.64.209(a) is amended to read:                                                                      
(a)  Each applicant who desires to practice podiatry shall meet the                                          
qualifications prescribed in AS 08.64.200(a)(3) - (5) [AS 08.64.200(a)(3) AND (4)]                            
and shall                                                                                                         
(1)  submit a certificate of graduation from a legally chartered school of                              
podiatry approved by the board;                                                                                   
(2)  take the examination required by AS 08.64.210; the State Medical                                   
Board shall call to its aid a podiatrist of known ability who is licensed to practice                             
podiatry to assist in the examination and licensure of applicants for a license to                                      
practice podiatry;                                                                                                
(3)  receive education in pain management and opioid use and                                                        
addiction, unless the applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the board                                   
that the applicant does not currently hold a valid federal Drug Enforcement                                         
Administration registration number; an applicant may include past professional                                      
experience or professional education as proof of professional competence;                                     
(4)  meet other qualifications of experience or education which the                                                 
board may require.                                                                                                
* Sec. 10. AS 08.64.225(a) is amended to read:                                                                     
(a)  Applicants who are graduates of medical colleges not accredited by the                                             
Association of American Medical Colleges and the Council on Medical Education of                                        
the American Medical Association shall                                                                            
(1)  meet the requirements of AS 08.64.200(a)(3) - (5)                                                              
[AS 08.64.200(a)(3) AND (4)] and 08.64.255;                                                                       
(2)  have successfully completed                                                                        
(A)  three years of postgraduate training as evidenced by a                                                             
certificate of completion of the first year of postgraduate training from the                                           
facility where the applicant completed the first year of internship or residency                                        
and a certificate of successful completion of two additional years of                                                   
postgraduate training at a recognized hospital; or                                                           
(B)  other requirements establishing proof of competency and                                                            
professional qualifications as the board considers necessary to ensure the                                              
continued protection of the public adopted at the discretion of the board by                                            
regulation, including education in pain management and opioid use and                                               
addiction, unless the applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the                                         
board that the applicant does not currently hold a valid federal Drug                                               
Enforcement Administration registration number; an applicant may                                                    
include past professional experience or professional education as proof of                                          
professional competence; and                                                                             
(3)  have passed examinations as specified by the board in regulations.                                 
* Sec. 11. AS 08.64.250 is amended to read:                                                                        
Sec. 08.64.250. License by credentials. The board may waive the examination                                           
requirement and license by credentials if the physician, osteopath, or podiatry                                     
applicant meets the requirements of AS 08.64.200, 08.64.205, or 08.64.209, submits                                  
proof of continued competence as required by regulation, pays the required fee, and                                 
has                                                                                                               
(1)  an active license from a board of medical examiners established                                                    
under the laws of a state or territory of the United States or a province or territory of                               
Canada issued after thorough examination; or                                                                      
(2)  passed an examination as specified by the board in regulations.                                    
* Sec. 12. AS 08.64.250 is amended by adding a new subsection to read:                                             
(b)  The board shall adopt regulations under (a) of this section that require an                                        
applicant demonstrate professional competence in pain management and addiction                                          
disorders. An applicant may include past professional experience or professional                                        
education as proof of professional competence.                                                                    
* Sec. 13. AS 08.64.312 is amended to read:                                                                        
Sec. 08.64.312. Continuing education requirements. (a) The board shall                                                
promote a high degree of competence in the practice of medicine, osteopathy, and                                    
podiatry by requiring every licensee of medicine, osteopathy, and podiatry                                      
[PHYSICIAN LICENSED] in the state to fulfill continuing education requirements.                                   
(b)  Before a license may be renewed, the licensee shall submit evidence to the                                         
board or its designee that continuing education requirements prescribed by regulations                                  
adopted by the board have been met. Continuing education requirements must                                          
include not less than two hours of education in pain management and opioid use                                      
and addiction for every 40 hours of education received, unless the licensee                                         
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the board that the licensee's practice does not                                 
include pain management and opioid treatment or prescribing.                                                  
(c)  The board or its designee may exempt a physician, osteopath, or                                                
podiatrist from the requirements of (b) of this section upon an application by the                                  
physician, osteopath, or podiatrist giving evidence satisfactory to the board or its                                
designee that the physician, osteopath, or podiatrist is unable to comply with the                                  
requirements because of extenuating circumstances. However, a person may not be                                         
exempted from more than 15 hours of continuing education in a five-year period; a                                   
person may not be exempted from the requirement to receive at least two hours                                       
of education in pain management and opioid use and addiction unless the person                                      
has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the board that the person does not                                          
currently hold a valid federal Drug Enforcement Administration registration                                         
number.                                                                                                       
* Sec. 14. AS 08.64.326(a) is amended to read:                                                                     
(a)  The board may impose a sanction if the board finds after a hearing that a                                          
licensee                                                                                                          
(1)  secured a license through deceit, fraud, or intentional                                                            
misrepresentation;                                                                                                
(2)  engaged in deceit, fraud, or intentional misrepresentation while                                                   
providing professional services or engaging in professional activities;                                           
(3)  advertised professional services in a false or misleading manner;                                  
(4)  has been convicted, including conviction based on a guilty plea or                                                 
plea of nolo contendere, of                                                                                       
(A)  a class A or unclassified felony or a crime in another                                                             
jurisdiction with elements similar to a class A or unclassified felony in this                                          
jurisdiction;                                                                                                
(B)  a class B or class C felony or a crime in another jurisdiction                                                     
with elements similar to a class B or class C felony in this jurisdiction if the                                        
felony or other crime is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or                          
duties of the licensee; or                                                                                   
(C)  a crime involving the unlawful procurement, sale,                                             
prescription, or dispensing of drugs;                                                                        
(5)  has procured, sold, prescribed, or dispensed drugs in violation of a                               
law regardless of whether there has been a criminal action or harm to the patient;                            
(6)  intentionally or negligently permitted the performance of patient                                  
care by persons under the licensee's supervision that does not conform to minimum                                 
professional standards even if the patient was not injured;                                                       
(7)  failed to comply with this chapter, a regulation adopted under this                                                
chapter, or an order of the board;                                                                                
(8)  has demonstrated                                                                                   
(A)  professional incompetence, gross negligence, or repeated                                                           
negligent conduct; the board may not base a finding of professional                                                     
incompetence solely on the basis that a licensee's practice is unconventional or                                        
experimental in the absence of demonstrable physical harm to a patient;                                      
(B)  addiction to, severe dependency on, or habitual overuse of                                                         
alcohol or other drugs that impairs the licensee's ability to practice safely;                               
(C)  unfitness because of physical or mental disability;                                           
(9)  engaged in unprofessional conduct, in sexual misconduct, or in                                                     
lewd or immoral conduct in connection with the delivery of professional services to                                     
patients; in this paragraph, "sexual misconduct" includes sexual contact, as defined by                                 
the board in regulations adopted under this chapter, or attempted sexual contact with a                                 
patient outside the scope of generally accepted methods of examination or treatment of                                  
the patient, regardless of the patient's consent or lack of consent, during the term of the                             
physician-patient relationship, as defined by the board in regulations adopted under                                    
this chapter, unless the patient was the licensee's spouse at the time of the contact or,                               
immediately preceding the physician-patient relationship, was in a dating, courtship,                                   
or engagement relationship with the licensee;                                                                     
(10)  has violated AS 18.16.010;                                                                        
(11)  has violated any code of ethics adopted by regulation by the                                                      
board;                                                                                                            
(12)  has denied care or treatment to a patient or person seeking                                                       
assistance from the physician if the only reason for the denial is the failure or refusal                               
of the patient to agree to arbitrate as provided in AS 09.55.535(a); [OR]                                         
(13)  has had a license or certificate to practice medicine in another                                                  
state or territory of the United States, or a province or territory of Canada, denied,                                  
suspended, revoked, surrendered while under investigation for an alleged violation,                                     
restricted, limited, conditioned, or placed on probation unless the denial, suspension,                                 
revocation, or other action was caused by the failure of the licensee to pay fees to that                               
state, territory, or province; or                                                                             
(14)  prescribed or dispensed an opioid in excess of the maximum                                                    
dosage authorized under AS 08.64.363.                                                                         
* Sec. 15. AS 08.64 is amended by adding a new section to article 3 to read:                                       
Sec. 08.64.363. Maximum dosage for opioid prescriptions. (a) A licensee                                               
may not issue                                                                                                     
(1)  an initial prescription for an opioid that exceeds a seven-day supply                                              
to an adult patient for outpatient use;                                                                           
(2)  a prescription for an opioid that exceeds a seven-day supply to a                                                  
minor; at the time a licensee writes a prescription for an opioid for a minor, the                                      
licensee shall discuss with the parent or guardian of the minor why the prescription is                                 
necessary and the risks associated with opioid use.                                                               
(b)  Notwithstanding (a) of this section, a licensee may issue a prescription for                                       
an opioid that exceeds a seven-day supply to an adult or minor patient if, in the                                       
professional medical judgment of the licensee, more than a seven-day supply of an                                       
opioid is necessary for                                                                                           
(1)  the patient's acute medical condition, chronic pain management,                                                    
pain associated with cancer, or pain experienced while the patient is in palliative care;                               
the licensee may write a prescription for an opioid for the quantity needed to treat the                                
patient's medical condition, chronic pain, pain associated with cancer, or pain                                         
experienced while the patient is in palliative care; the licensee shall document in the                                 
patient's medical record the condition triggering the prescription of an opioid in a                                    
quantity that exceeds a seven-day supply and indicate that a nonopioid alternative was                                  
not appropriate to address the medical condition;                                                                 
(2)  a patient who is unable to access a practitioner within the time                                                   
necessary for a refill of the seven-day supply because of a logistical or travel barrier;                               
the licensee may write a prescription for an opioid for the quantity needed to treat the                                
patient for the time that the patient is unable to access a practitioner; the licensee shall                            
document in the patient's medical record the reason for the prescription of an opioid in                                
a quantity that exceeds a seven-day supply and indicate that a nonopioid alternative                                    
was not appropriate to address the medical condition; in this paragraph, "practitioner"                                 
has the meaning given in AS 11.71.900; or                                                                         
(3)  the treatment of a patient's substance abuse or opioid dependence;                                                 
the licensee may write a prescription for an opioid approved for the treatment of                                       
substance abuse or opioid dependence for the quantity needed to treat the patient's                                     
substance abuse or opioid dependence; the licensee shall document in the patient's                                      
medical record the reason for the prescription of an opioid approved for the treatment                                  
of substance abuse or opioid dependence in a quantity that exceeds a seven-day supply                                   
and indicate that a nonopioid alternative was not appropriate for the treatment of                                      
substance abuse or opioid dependence.                                                                             
(c)  In this section,                                                                                        
(1)  "adult" means                                                                                      
(A)  an individual who has reached 18 years of age; or                                             
(B)  an emancipated minor;                                                                         
(2)  "emancipated minor" means a minor whose disabilities have been                                                     
removed for general purposes under AS 09.55.590;                                                                  
(3)  "minor" means a individual under 18 years of age who is not an                                                     
emancipated minor.                                                                                                
* Sec. 16. AS 08.64.364(c) is amended to read:                                                                     
(c)  The board may not impose disciplinary sanctions on a physician for                                                 
prescribing, dispensing, or administering a prescription drug that is a controlled                                      
substance or botulinum toxin if the requirements under (a) of this section and                                      
AS 08.64.363 are met and the physician prescribes, dispenses, or administers the                                    
controlled substance or botulinum toxin when an appropriate licensed health care                                  
provider is present with the patient to assist the physician with examination, diagnosis,                         
and treatment.                                                                                                    
* Sec. 17. AS 08.64.380 is amended by adding a new paragraph to read:                                              
(7)  "opioid" includes the opium and opiate substances and opium and                                    
opiate derivatives listed in AS 11.71.140.                                                                        
* Sec. 18. AS 08.68.100(a), as amended by sec. 10, ch. 25, SLA 2016, is amended to read:                           
(a)  The board shall                                                                                         
(1)  adopt regulations necessary to implement this chapter, including                                   
regulations                                                                                                       
(A)  pertaining to practice as an advanced practice registered                                                          
nurse, including requirements for an advanced practice registered nurse to                                              
practice as a certified registered nurse anesthetist, certified clinical nurse                                          
specialist, certified nurse practitioner, or certified nurse midwife; regulations                                   
for an advanced practice registered nurse who holds a valid federal Drug                                            
Enforcement Administration registration number must address training                                                
in pain management and opioid use and addiction;                                                         
(B)  necessary to implement AS 08.68.331 - 08.68.336 relating                                                           
to certified nurse aides in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of                                         
clients served by nurse aides;                                                                               
(C)  pertaining to retired nurse status; and                                                       
(D)  establishing criteria for approval of practical nurse                                                              
education programs that are not accredited by a national nursing accrediting                                            
body;                                                                                                        
(2)  approve curricula and adopt standards for basic education programs                                                 
that prepare persons for licensing under AS 08.68.190;                                                            
(3)  provide for surveys of the basic nursing education programs in the                                                 
state at the times it considers necessary;                                                                        
(4)  approve education programs that meet the requirements of this                                                      
chapter and of the board, and deny, revoke, or suspend approval of education                                            
programs for failure to meet the requirements;                                                                    
(5)  examine, license, and renew the licenses of qualified applicants;                                  
(6)  prescribe requirements for competence before a former registered,                                  
advanced practice registered, or licensed practical nurse may resume the practice of                              
nursing under this chapter;                                                                                       
(7)  define by regulation the qualifications and duties of the executive                                
administrator and delegate authority to the executive administrator that is necessary to                          
conduct board business;                                                                                           
(8)  develop reasonable and uniform standards for nursing practice;                                     
(9)  publish advisory opinions regarding whether nursing practice                                       
procedures or policies comply with acceptable standards of nursing practice as defined                                  
under this chapter;                                                                                               
(10)  require applicants under this chapter to submit fingerprints and the                                              
fees required by the Department of Public Safety under AS 12.62.160 for criminal                                        
justice information and a national criminal history record check; the department shall                                  
submit the fingerprints and fees to the Department of Public Safety for a report of                                     
criminal justice information under AS 12.62 and a national criminal history record                                      
check under AS 12.62.400;                                                                                         
(11)  require that a licensed advanced practice registered nurse                                                    
[PRACTITIONER] who has a federal Drug Enforcement Administration registration                                           
number register with the controlled substance prescription database under                                               
AS 17.30.200(o).                                                                                                  
* Sec. 19. AS 08.68.270 is amended to read:                                                                        
Sec. 08.68.270. Grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation. The board                                              
may deny, suspend, or revoke the license of a person who                                                          
(1)  has obtained or attempted to obtain a license to practice nursing by                                               
fraud or deceit;                                                                                                  
(2)  has been convicted of a felony or other crime if the felony or other                                               
crime is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the licensee;                       
(3)  habitually abuses alcoholic beverages, or illegally uses controlled                                                
substances;                                                                                                       
(4)  has impersonated a registered, advanced practice registered, or                                                    
practical nurse;                                                                                                  
(5)  has intentionally or negligently engaged in conduct that has                                       
resulted in a significant risk to the health or safety of a client or in injury to a client;                      
(6)  practices or attempts to practice nursing while afflicted with                                     
physical or mental illness, deterioration, or disability that interferes with the                                 
individual's performance of nursing functions;                                                                    
(7)  is guilty of unprofessional conduct as defined by regulations                                      
adopted by the board;                                                                                             
(8)  has wilfully or repeatedly violated a provision of this chapter or                                 
regulations adopted under this chapter or AS 08.01;                                                               
(9)  is professionally incompetent;                                                                     
(10)  denies care or treatment to a patient or person seeking assistance                                                
if the sole reason for the denial is the failure or refusal of the patient or person seeking                            
assistance to agree to arbitrate as provided in AS 09.55.535(a);                                              
(11)  has prescribed or dispensed an opioid in excess of the                                                        
maximum dosage authorized under AS 08.68.705; or                                                              
(12)  has procured, sold, prescribed, or dispensed drugs in violation                                               
of a law, regardless of whether there has been a criminal action or harm to the                                     
patient.                                                                                                      
* Sec. 20. AS 08.68.276 is amended to read:                                                                        
Sec. 08.68.276. Continuing competence required. A license to practice                                                 
nursing may not be renewed unless the nurse has complied with continuing                                                
competence requirements established by the board by regulation. The board shall                                     
adopt regulations for renewal of a license of an advanced practice registered                                       
nurse. The regulations must require that a licensee receive not less than two                                       
hours of education in pain management and opioid use and addiction in the two                                       
years preceding an application for renewal of a license unless the licensee has                                     
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the board that the licensee does not currently                                  
hold a valid federal Drug Enforcement Administration registration number.                                     
* Sec. 21. AS 08.68 is amended by adding a new section to article 6 to read:                                       
Sec. 08.68.705. Maximum dosage for opioid prescriptions. (a) An advanced                                              
practice registered nurse may not issue                                                                           
(1)  an initial prescription for an opioid that exceeds a seven-day supply                              
to an adult patient for outpatient use;                                                                           
(2)  a prescription for an opioid that exceeds a seven-day supply to a                                                  
minor; at the time an advanced practice registered nurse writes a prescription for an                                   
opioid for a minor, the advanced practice registered nurse shall discuss with the parent                                
or guardian of the minor why the prescription is necessary and the risks associated                                     
with opioid use.                                                                                                  
(b)  Notwithstanding (a) of this section, an advanced practice registered nurse                              
may issue a prescription for an opioid that exceeds a seven-day supply to an adult or                                   
minor patient if, in the professional judgment of the advanced practice registered                                      
nurse, more than a seven-day supply of an opioid is necessary for                                                 
(1)  the patient's acute medical condition, chronic pain management,                                                    
pain associated with cancer, or pain experienced while the patient is in palliative care;                               
the advanced practice registered nurse may write a prescription for an opioid for the                                   
quantity needed to treat the patient's medical condition, chronic pain, pain associated                                 
with cancer, or pain experienced while the patient is in palliative care; the advanced                                  
practice registered nurse shall document in the patient's medical record the condition                                  
triggering the prescription of an opioid in a quantity that exceeds a seven-day supply                                  
and indicate that a nonopioid alternative was not appropriate to address the medical                                    
condition; or                                                                                                     
(2)  a patient who is unable to access a practitioner within the time                                                   
necessary for a refill of the seven-day supply because of a logistical or travel barrier;                               
the advanced practice registered nurse may write a prescription for an opioid for the                                   
quantity needed to treat the patient for the time that the patient is unable to access a                                
practitioner; the advanced practice registered nurse shall document in the patient's                                    
medical record the reason for the prescription of an opioid in a quantity that exceeds a                                
seven-day supply and indicate that a nonopioid alternative was not appropriate to                                       
address the medical condition; in this paragraph, "practitioner" has the meaning given                                  
in AS 11.71.900.                                                                                                  
(c)  This section does not authorize an advanced practice registered nurse to                                           
prescribe a controlled substance if the advanced practice registered nurse is not                                 
otherwise authorized to prescribe a controlled substance under policies, procedures, or                           
regulations issued or adopted by the board.                                                                       
(d)  In this section,                                                                                        
(1)  "adult" means                                                                                      
(A)  an individual who has reached 18 years of age; or                                             
(B)  an emancipated minor;                                                                         
(2)  "emancipated minor" means a minor whose disabilities have been                                     
removed for general purposes under AS 09.55.590;                                                                  
(3)  "minor" means an individual under 18 years of age who is not an                                                    
emancipated minor.                                                                                                
* Sec. 22. AS 08.68.850 is amended by adding a new paragraph to read:                                              
(12)  "opioid" includes the opium and opiate substances and opium and                                                   
opiate derivatives listed in AS 11.71.140.                                                                        
* Sec. 23. AS 08.72.140 is amended to read:                                                                        
Sec. 08.72.140. Qualifications for licensure. An applicant for licensure as an                                        
optometrist                                                                                                       
(1)  shall be a graduate of a school or college of optometry recognized                                                 
by the board;                                                                                                     
(2)  may not have committed an act in any jurisdiction that would have                                                  
constituted a violation of this chapter or regulations adopted under this chapter at the                                
time the act was committed;                                                                                       
(3)  may not have been disciplined by an optometry licensing entity in                                                  
another jurisdiction and may not be the subject of a pending disciplinary proceeding                                    
conducted by an optometry licensing entity in another jurisdiction; however, the board                                  
may consider the disciplinary action and, in the board's discretion, determine if the                                   
person is qualified for licensure;                                                                                
(4)  shall have successfully completed                                                                  
(A)  the written and practical portions of an examination on                                                            
ocular pharmacology approved by the board that tests the licensee's or                                                  
applicant's knowledge of the characteristics, pharmacological effects,                                                  
indications, contraindications, and emergency care associated with the                                       
prescription and use of pharmaceutical agents;                                                               
(B)  a nontopical therapeutic pharmaceutical agent course of at                                    
least 23 hours approved by the board or an examination approved by the board                                 
on the treatment and management of ocular disease; and                                                       
(C)  an optometry and nontopical therapeutic pharmaceutical                                        
agent injection course of at least seven hours approved by the board or                                      
equivalent training acceptable to the board; and                                                             
(5)  shall meet other qualifications for licensure as established under                                 
this chapter and regulations adopted by the board under AS 08.72.050; the                                           
regulations must include qualifications for licensees who hold a valid federal                                      
Drug Enforcement Administration registration number that address training in                                        
pain management and opioid use and addiction.                                                                 
* Sec. 24. AS 08.72.170 is amended to read:                                                                        
Sec. 08.72.170. Licensure by credentials. The board shall issue a license by                                          
credentials to an applicant who                                                                                   
(1)  is a graduate of a school or college of optometry recognized by the                                                
board;                                                                                                            
(2)  has passed a written examination approved by the board that is                                                     
designed to test the applicant's knowledge of the laws of Alaska governing the practice                                 
of optometry and the regulations adopted under those laws;                                                        
(3)  holds a current license to practice optometry in another state or                                                  
territory of the United States or in a province of Canada that has licensure                                            
requirements that the board determines are equivalent to those established under this                                   
chapter;                                                                                                          
(4)  at some time in the past, received a license to practice optometry                                                 
from another state or territory of the United States or from a province of Canada that                                  
required the person to have passed the National Board of Examiners in Optometry                                         
examination to qualify for licensure;                                                                             
(5)  was engaged in the active licensed clinical practice of optometry in                                               
a state or territory of the United States or in a province of Canada for at least 3,120                                 
hours during the 36 months preceding the date of application under this section;                                  
(6)  has not committed an act in any jurisdiction that would have                                       
constituted a violation of this chapter or regulations adopted under this chapter at the                          
time the act was committed; [AND]                                                                                 
(7)  has not been disciplined by an optometry licensing entity in another                                               
jurisdiction and is not the subject of a pending disciplinary proceeding conducted by                                   
an optometry licensing entity in another jurisdiction; however, the board may consider                                  
the disciplinary action and, in the board's discretion, determine whether [IF] the                                  
person is qualified for licensure; and                                                                        
(8)  has received education in pain management and opioid use and                                                   
addiction adequate for the practice of optometry, unless the applicant has                                          
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the board that the applicant does not                                           
currently hold a valid federal Drug Enforcement Administration registration                                         
number; an applicant may include past professional experience or professional                                       
education as proof of professional competence.                                                                
* Sec. 25. AS 08.72.181(d) is amended to read:                                                                     
(d)  Before a license may be renewed, the licensee shall submit to the board                                            
evidence that, in the four years preceding the application for renewal, the licensee has                          
(1)  completed eight hours of continuing education, approved by the                                                     
board, concerning the use and prescription of pharmaceutical agents;                                              
(2)  completed seven hours of continuing education, approved by the                                                     
board, concerning the injection of nontopical therapeutic pharmaceutical agents;                                        
[AND]                                                                                                             
(3)  completed at least two hours of education in pain management                                                   
and opioid use and addiction, unless the applicant has demonstrated to the                                          
satisfaction of the board that the applicant does not currently hold a valid federal                                
Drug Enforcement Administration registration number; and                                                      
(4)  met other continuing education requirements as may be prescribed                                               
by regulations of the board to ensure the continued protection of the public.                                     
* Sec. 26. AS 08.72.240 is amended to read:                                                                        
Sec. 08.72.240. Grounds for imposition of disciplinary sanctions. The board                                           
may impose disciplinary sanctions when the board finds after a hearing that a licensee                            
(1)  secured a license through deceit, fraud, or intentional                                            
misrepresentation;                                                                                                
(2)  engaged in deceit, fraud, or intentional misrepresentation in the                                  
course of providing professional services or engaging in professional activities;                                 
(3)  advertised professional services in a false or misleading manner;                                  
(4)  has been convicted of a felony or other crime that [WHICH]                                     
affects the licensee's ability to continue to practice competently and safely;                                    
(5)  intentionally or negligently engaged in or permitted the                                           
performance of patient care by persons under the licensee's supervision that [WHICH]                                
does not conform to minimum professional standards regardless of whether actual                                         
injury to the patient occurred;                                                                                   
(6)  failed to comply with this chapter, with a regulation adopted under                                                
this chapter, or with an order of the board;                                                                      
(7)  continued to practice after becoming unfit due to                                                  
(A)  professional incompetence;                                                                    
(B)  failure to keep informed of or use current professional                                                            
theories or practices;                                                                                       
(C)  addiction or severe dependency on alcohol or other drugs                                                           
that [WHICH] impairs the licensee's ability to practice safely;                                          
(D)  physical or mental disability;                                                                
(8)  engaged in lewd or immoral conduct in connection with the                                                          
delivery of professional service to patients;                                                                     
(9)  failed to refer a patient to a physician after ascertaining the                                                    
presence of ocular or systemic conditions requiring management by a physician;                                
(10)  procured, sold, prescribed, or dispensed drugs in violation of                                                
a law, regardless of whether there has been a criminal action or harm to the                                        
patient.                                                                                                      
* Sec. 27. AS 08.80.030(b), as amended by sec. 12, ch. 25, SLA 2016, is amended to read:                           
(b)  In order to fulfill its responsibilities, the board has the powers necessary                                       
for implementation and enforcement of this chapter, including the power to                                        
(1)  elect a president and secretary from its membership and adopt rules                                
for the conduct of its business;                                                                                  
(2)  license by examination or by license transfer the applicants who are                               
qualified to engage in the practice of pharmacy;                                                                  
(3)  assist the department in inspections and investigations for                                        
violations of this chapter, or of any other state or federal statute relating to the practice                     
of pharmacy;                                                                                                      
(4)  adopt regulations to carry out the purposes of this chapter;                                       
(5)  establish and enforce compliance with professional standards and                                   
rules of conduct for pharmacists engaged in the practice of pharmacy;                                             
(6)  determine standards for recognition and approval of degree                                                         
programs of schools and colleges of pharmacy whose graduates shall be eligible for                                      
licensure in this state, including the specification and enforcement of requirements for                                
practical training, including internships;                                                                        
(7)  establish for pharmacists and pharmacies minimum specifications                                                    
for the physical facilities, technical equipment, personnel, and procedures for the                                     
storage, compounding, and dispensing of drugs or related devices, and for the                                           
monitoring of drug therapy;                                                                                       
(8)  enforce the provisions of this chapter relating to the conduct or                                                  
competence of pharmacists practicing in the state, and the suspension, revocation, or                                   
restriction of licenses to engage in the practice of pharmacy;                                                    
(9)  license and regulate the training, qualifications, and employment of                                               
pharmacy interns and pharmacy technicians;                                                                        
(10)  issue licenses to persons engaged in the manufacture and                                                          
distribution of drugs and related devices;                                                                        
(11)  establish and maintain a controlled substance prescription                                                        
database as provided in AS 17.30.200;                                                                             
(12)  establish standards for the independent administration by a                                                       
pharmacist of vaccines and related emergency medications under AS 08.80.168,                                            
including the completion of an immunization training program approved by the board;                                     
(13)  establish standards for the independent dispensing by a                                                           
pharmacist of an opioid overdose drug under AS 17.20.085, including the completion                                
of an opioid overdose training program approved by the board;                                                     
(14)  require that a licensed pharmacist [WHO HAS A FEDERAL                                             
DRUG ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATION REGISTRATION NUMBER]                                                              
register with the controlled substance prescription database under AS 17.30.200(o).                               
* Sec. 28. AS 08.80 is amended by adding a new section to article 3 to read:                                       
Sec. 08.80.345. Prescription for an opioid; voluntary request for lesser                                            
quantity. (a) A pharmacist filling a prescription for an opioid that is a schedule II or                              
III controlled substance under federal law may, at the request of the individual for                                    
whom the prescription is written, dispense the prescribed opioid in a lesser quantity                                   
than prescribed.                                                                                                  
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent substitution of an                                           
equivalent drug under AS 08.80.295.                                                                               
* Sec. 29. AS 08.98.050(a) is amended to read:                                                                     
(a)  The board shall                                                                                         
(1)  establish examination requirements for eligible applicants for                                                     
licensure to practice veterinary medicine;                                                                        
(2)  examine, or cause to be examined, eligible applicants for licensure                                                
or registration;                                                                                                  
(3)  approve the issuance of licenses and student permits to qualified                                                  
applicants;                                                                                                       
(4)  establish standards for the practice of veterinary medicine by                                                     
regulation;                                                                                                       
(5)  conduct disciplinary proceedings in accordance with this chapter;                                  
(6)  adopt regulations requiring proof of continued competency before a                                                 
license is renewed;                                                                                               
(7)  as requested by the department, monitor the standards and                                                          
availability of veterinary services provided in the state and report its findings to the                                
department;                                                                                                       
(8)  collect, or cause to be collected, data concerning the practice of                                                 
veterinary technology by veterinary technicians in the state and submit the data to the                                 
department for maintenance;                                                                                       
(9)  establish, by regulation, educational and training requirements for                                
(A)  the issuance of student permits; and                                                          
(B)  the delegation of duties by veterinarians licensed under this                                 
chapter to veterinary technicians;                                                                       
(10)  require that a licensee who has a federal Drug Enforcement                                    
Administration registration number register with the controlled substance                                     
prescription database under AS 17.30.200(o);                                                                  
(11)  identify resources and develop educational materials to assist                                
licensees to identify an animal owner who may be at risk for abusing or misusing                                    
an opioid.                                                                                                    
* Sec. 30. AS 08.98.235 is amended to read:                                                                        
Sec. 08.98.235. Grounds for imposition of disciplinary sanctions. After a                                             
hearing, the board may impose a disciplinary sanction on a person licensed under this                                   
chapter when the board finds that the person                                                                      
(1)  secured a license through deceit, fraud, or intentional                                                            
misrepresentation;                                                                                                
(2)  engaged in deceit, fraud, or intentional misrepresentation in the                                                  
course of providing professional services or engaging in professional activities;                                 
(3)  advertised professional services in a false or misleading manner;                                  
(4)  has been convicted of a felony or other crime which affects the                                                    
person's ability to continue to practice competently and safely;                                                  
(5)  intentionally or negligently engaged in or permitted the                                                           
performance of animal care by the person's supervisees which does not conform to                                        
minimum professional standards regardless of whether actual injury to the animal                                        
occurred;                                                                                                         
(6)  failed to comply with this chapter, with a regulation adopted under                                                
this chapter, or with an order of the board;                                                                      
(7)  continued to practice after becoming unfit due to                                                  
(A)  professional incompetence;                                                                    
(B)  addiction or severe dependency on alcohol or other drugs                                                           
which impairs the person's ability to practice safely;                                                       
(C)  physical or mental disability;                                                                
(8)  engaged in lewd or immoral conduct in connection with the                                          
delivery of professional service;                                                                             
(9)  procured, sold, prescribed, or dispensed drugs in violation of a                               
law, regardless of whether there has been a criminal action.                                                  
* Sec. 31. AS 13 is amended by adding a new chapter to read:                                                       
Chapter 55. Voluntary Nonopioid Directive Act.                                                        
Sec. 13.55.010. Nonopioid directive; revocation; other requirements. (a)                                   
An individual who is 18 years of age or older may execute a voluntary nonopioid                                         
directive stating that an opioid may not be administered or prescribed to the                                           
individual. The directive must be in a format prescribed by the department and                                          
available in an electronic format.                                                                                
(b)  The commissioner of health and social services shall adopt regulations to                                          
implement this chapter. The regulations must                                                                      
(1)  include verification by a health care provider and comply with the                                                 
written consent requirements under 42 U.S.C. 290dd-2(b);                                                          
(2)  provide standard procedures for an individual to submit a voluntary                                                
nonopioid directive to a health care provider or hospital;                                                        
(3)  include appropriate exemptions for emergency medical personnel;                                    
(4)  ensure the confidentiality of a voluntary nonopioid directive;                                     
(5)  ensure exemptions for an opioid used for treatment of substance                                                    
abuse or opioid dependence.                                                                                       
(c)  An individual may revoke a voluntary nonopioid directive at any time in                                            
writing or orally. An individual's guardian, conservator, or other person appointed by                                  
the individual or a court to manage the individual's health care                                                  
(1)  may revoke an individual's voluntary nonopioid directive at any                                                    
time, in writing or orally;                                                                                       
(2)  may not execute a voluntary nonopioid directive on behalf of the                                                   
individual.                                                                                                       
(d)  An individual may submit a voluntary nonopioid directive to a health care                                          
provider or a hospital.                                                                                           
Sec. 13.55.020. Obligations of health care providers and hospitals. A health                                          
care provider, a hospital, or an employee of a health care provider or hospital may not                                 
be subject to disciplinary action by the health care provider's or the employee's                                       
professional licensing board or held civilly or criminally liable for failure to                                        
administer, prescribe, or dispense an opioid, or for inadvertent administration of an                                   
opioid, to an individual who has executed a voluntary nonopioid directive.                                        
Sec. 13.55.030. Prescriptions presumed valid. A prescription presented to a                                           
pharmacy is presumed to be valid, and a pharmacist may not be subject to disciplinary                                   
action by the pharmacist's professional licensing board or held civilly or criminally                                   
liable for dispensing a controlled substance in contradiction to an individual's                                        
voluntary nonopioid directive.                                                                                    
Sec. 13.55.040. Effect of this chapter. Nothing is this chapter shall be                                              
construed to                                                                                                    
(1)  alter an advance health care directive under AS 13.52 (Health Care                                                 
Decisions Act);                                                                                                   
(2)  limit the prescribing, dispensing, or administering of an opioid                                                   
overdose drug;                                                                                                    
(3)  limit an authorized health care provider or pharmacist from                                                        
prescribing, dispensing, or administering an opioid for the treatment of substance                                      
abuse or opioid dependence.                                                                                       
Sec. 13.55.100. Definitions. In this chapter, unless the context otherwise                                            
requires,                                                                                                         
(1)  "department" means the Department of Health and Social Services;                                   
(2)  "health care provider" has the meaning given in AS 09.65.340;                                      
(3)  "hospital" has the meaning given in AS 13.52.268;                                                  
(4)  "opioid" includes the opium and opiate substances and opium and                                                    
opiate derivatives listed in AS 11.71.140;                                                                        
(5)  "opioid overdose drug" has the meaning given in AS 09.65.340.                                      
Sec. 13.55.110. Short title. This chapter may be known as the Voluntary                                               
Nonopioid Directive Act.                                                                                          
* Sec. 32. AS 17.30.200(a), as amended by sec. 21, ch. 25, SLA 2016, is amended to read:                           
(a)  The controlled substance prescription database is established in the Board                                         
of Pharmacy. The purpose of the database is to contain data as described in this                                        
section regarding every prescription for a schedule II, III, or IV controlled substance                                 
under federal law dispensed in the state to a person other than under the                                           
circumstances described in (u) of this section [THOSE ADMINISTERED TO A                                             
PATIENT AT A HEALTH CARE FACILITY].                                                                               
* Sec. 33. AS 17.30.200(b), as amended by sec. 23, ch. 25, SLA 2016, is amended to read:                           
(b)  The pharmacist-in-charge of each licensed or registered pharmacy,                                       
regarding each schedule II, III, or IV controlled substance under federal law dispensed                                 
by a pharmacist under the supervision of the pharmacist-in-charge, and each                                             
practitioner who directly dispenses a schedule II, III, or IV controlled substance under                                
federal law other than those dispensed or administered under the circumstances                                      
described in (u) of this section [ADMINISTERED TO A PATIENT AT A HEALTH                                             
CARE FACILITY], shall submit to the board, by a procedure and in a format                                               
established by the board, the following information for inclusion in the database on at                                 
least a weekly basis:                                                                                             
(1)  the name of the prescribing practitioner and the practitioner's                                                    
federal Drug Enforcement Administration registration number or other appropriate                                        
identifier;                                                                                                       
(2)  the date of the prescription;                                                                      
(3)  the date the prescription was filled and the method of payment; this                                               
paragraph does not authorize the board to include individual credit card or other                                       
account numbers in the database;                                                                                  
(4)  the name, address, and date of birth of the person for whom the                                                    
prescription was written;                                                                                         
(5)  the name and national drug code of the controlled substance;                                       
(6)  the quantity and strength of the controlled substance dispensed;                                   
(7)  the name of the drug outlet dispensing the controlled substance;                                                   
and                                                                                                               
(8)  the name of the pharmacist or practitioner dispensing the controlled                                               
substance and other appropriate identifying information.                                                          
* Sec. 34. AS 17.30.200(b), as amended by sec. 33 of this Act, is amended to read:                                 
(b)  The pharmacist-in-charge of each licensed or registered pharmacy,                                                  
regarding each schedule II, III, or IV controlled substance under federal law dispensed                                 
by a pharmacist under the supervision of the pharmacist-in-charge, and each                                             
practitioner who directly dispenses a schedule II, III, or IV controlled substance under                                
federal law other than those dispensed or administered under the circumstances                                          
described in (u) of this section, shall submit to the board, by a procedure and in a                                    
format established by the board, the following information for inclusion in the                                         
database on at least a daily [WEEKLY] basis:                                                                  
(1)  the name of the prescribing practitioner and the practitioner's                                                    
federal Drug Enforcement Administration registration number or other appropriate                                        
identifier;                                                                                                       
(2)  the date of the prescription;                                                                      
(3)  the date the prescription was filled and the method of payment; this                                               
paragraph does not authorize the board to include individual credit card or other                                       
account numbers in the database;                                                                                  
(4)  the name, address, and date of birth of the person for whom the                                                    
prescription was written;                                                                                         
(5)  the name and national drug code of the controlled substance;                                       
(6)  the quantity and strength of the controlled substance dispensed;                                   
(7)  the name of the drug outlet dispensing the controlled substance;                                                   
and                                                                                                               
(8)  the name of the pharmacist or practitioner dispensing the controlled                                               
substance and other appropriate identifying information.                                                          
* Sec. 35. AS 17.30.200(d), as amended by sec. 25, ch. 25, SLA 2016, is amended to read:                           
(d)  The database and the information contained within the database are                                                 
confidential, are not public records, and are not subject to public disclosure [, AND                               
MAY NOT BE SHARED WITH THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT]. The board shall                                                         
undertake to ensure the security and confidentiality of the database and the                                            
information contained within the database. The board may allow access to the                                            
database only to the following persons, and in accordance with the limitations                                    
provided and regulations of the board:                                                                            
(1)  personnel of the board regarding inquiries concerning licensees or                                                 
registrants of the board or personnel of another board or agency concerning a                                           
practitioner under a search warrant, subpoena, or order issued by an administrative law                                 
judge or a court;                                                                                                 
(2)  authorized board personnel or contractors as required for                                          
operational and review purposes;                                                                                  
(3)  a licensed practitioner having authority to prescribe controlled                                   
substances or an agent or employee of the practitioner whom the practitioner has                                        
authorized to access the database on the practitioner's behalf, to the extent the                                       
information relates specifically to a current patient of the practitioner to whom the                                   
practitioner is prescribing or considering prescribing a controlled substance; the agent                                
or employee must be licensed or registered under AS 08;                                                           
(4)  a licensed or registered pharmacist having authority to dispense                                                   
controlled substances or an agent or employee of the pharmacist whom the pharmacist                                     
has authorized to access the database on the pharmacist's behalf, to the extent the                                     
information relates specifically to a current patient to whom the pharmacist is                                         
dispensing or considering dispensing a controlled substance; the agent or employee                                      
must be licensed or registered under AS 08;                                                                       
(5)  federal, state, and local law enforcement authorities may receive                                          
printouts of information contained in the database under a search warrant or order                                      
issued by a court establishing probable cause for the access and use of the information;                                
(6)  an individual who is the recipient of a controlled substance                                                       
prescription entered into the database may receive information contained in the                                         
database concerning the individual on providing evidence satisfactory to the board that                                 
the individual requesting the information is in fact the person about whom the data                                     
entry was made and on payment of a fee set by the board under AS 37.10.050 that                                         
does not exceed $10;                                                                                              
(7)  a licensed pharmacist employed by the Department of Health and                                                     
Social Services who is responsible for administering prescription drug coverage for                                     
the medical assistance program under AS 47.07, to the extent that the information                                 
relates specifically to prescription drug coverage under the program;                                             
(8)  a licensed pharmacist, licensed practitioner, or authorized                                                        
employee of the Department of Health and Social Services responsible for utilization                                    
review of prescription drugs for the medical assistance program under AS 47.07, to the                                  
extent that the information relates specifically to utilization review of prescription                                  
drugs provided to recipients of medical assistance;                                                               
(9)  the state medical examiner, to the extent that the information                                     
relates specifically to investigating the cause and manner of a person's death;                                   
(10)  an authorized employee of the Department of Health and Social                                                     
Services may receive information from the database that does not disclose the identity                                  
of a patient, prescriber, dispenser, or dispenser location, for the purpose of identifying                              
and monitoring public health issues in the state; however, the information provided                                     
under this paragraph may include the region of the state in which a patient, prescriber,                                
and dispenser are located and the specialty of the prescriber; and                                                
(11)  a practitioner, pharmacist, or clinical staff employed by an Alaska                                               
tribal health organization, including commissioned corps officers of the United States                                  
Public Health Service employed under a memorandum of agreement; in this                                                 
paragraph, "Alaska tribal health organization" has the meaning given to "tribal health                                  
program" in 25 U.S.C. 1603.                                                                                       
* Sec. 36. AS 17.30.200(e), as amended by sec. 27, ch. 25, SLA 2016, is amended to read:                           
(e)  The failure of a pharmacist-in-charge or a [,] pharmacist [, OR                                                
PRACTITIONER] to register or submit information to the database as required under                                       
this section is grounds for the board to take disciplinary action against the license or                                
registration of the pharmacy or pharmacist. The failure of a practitioner to register                               
or review the database as required under this section is grounds for the                                            
practitioner's [OR FOR ANOTHER] licensing board to take disciplinary action                                         
against the [A] practitioner.                                                                                 
* Sec. 37. AS 17.30.200(p), enacted by sec. 34, ch. 25, SLA 2016, is amended to read:                              
(p)  The board shall promptly notify the State Medical Board, the Board of                                              
Nursing, the Board of Dental Examiners, [AND] the Board of Examiners in                                                 
Optometry, and the Board of Veterinary Examiners when a practitioner registers                                
with the database under (o) of this section.                                                                      
* Sec. 38. AS 17.30.200(q), enacted by sec. 34, ch. 25, SLA 2016, is amended to read:                              
(q)  The board is authorized to provide unsolicited notification to a pharmacist,                                   
practitioner's licensing board, or practitioner if a patient has received one or more                               
prescriptions for controlled substances in quantities or with a frequency inconsistent                                  
with generally recognized standards of safe practice. An unsolicited notification to a                              
practitioner's licensing board under this section                                                             
(1)  must be provided to the practitioner;                                                          
(2)  is confidential;                                                                               
(3)  may not disclose information that is confidential under this                                                   
section;                                                                                                      
(4)  may be in a summary form sufficient to provide notice of the                                                   
basis for the unsolicited notification.                                                                       
* Sec. 39. AS 17.30.200(r), enacted by sec. 34, ch. 25, SLA 2016, is amended to read:                              
(r)  The board shall update the database on at least a daily [WEEKLY] basis                                         
with the information submitted to the board under (b) of this section.                                            
* Sec. 40. AS 17.30.200(n) is amended by adding a new paragraph to read:                                           
(5)  "opioid" includes the opium and opiate substances and opium and                                                    
opiate derivatives listed in AS 11.71.140.                                                                        
* Sec. 41. AS 17.30.200 is amended by adding new subsections to read:                                              
(t)  Notwithstanding (q) of this section, the board may issue to a practitioner                                         
periodic unsolicited reports that detail and compare the practitioner's opioid                                          
prescribing practice with other practitioners of the same occupation and similar                                        
specialty. A report issued under this subsection is confidential and the board shall                                    
issue the report only to a practitioner. The board may adopt regulations to implement                                   
this subsection. The regulations may address the types of controlled substances to be                                   
included in an unsolicited report, the quantities dispensed, the medication strength,                                   
and other factors determined by the board.                                                                        
(u)  A practitioner or a pharmacist is not required to comply with the                                                  
requirements of (a) and (b) of this section if a controlled substance is                                          
(1)  administered to a patient at                                                                       
(A)  a health care facility; or                                                                    
(B)  a correctional facility;                                                                      
(2)  dispensed to a patient for an outpatient supply of 24 hours or less at                             
a hospital                                                                                                        
(A)  inpatient pharmacy; or                                                                        
(B)  emergency department.                                                                         
* Sec. 42. AS 18.05.040(a) is amended to read:                                                                     
(a)  The commissioner shall adopt regulations consistent with existing law for                               
(1)  the time, manner, information to be reported, and persons                                                          
responsible for reporting for each disease or other condition of public health                                          
importance on the list developed under AS 18.15.370;                                                              
(2)  cooperation with local boards of health and health officers;                                       
(3)  protection and promotion of the public health and prevention of                                                    
disability and mortality;                                                                                         
(4)  the transportation of dead bodies, except that the commissioner                                                    
may not require that a dead body be embalmed unless the body is known to carry a                                        
communicable disease or embalmment is otherwise required for the protection of the                                      
public health or for compliance with federal law;                                                                 
(5)  carrying out the purposes of this chapter;                                                         
(6)  the conduct of its business and for carrying out the provisions of                                                 
laws of the United States and the state relating to public health;                                                
(7)  establishing the divisions and local offices and advisory groups                                                   
necessary or considered expedient to carry out or assist in carrying out a duty or power                                
assigned to it;                                                                                                   
(8)  the voluntary certification of laboratories to perform diagnostic,                                                 
quality control, or enforcement analyses or examinations based on recognized or                                         
tentative standards of performance relating to analysis and examination of food,                                        
including seafood, milk, water, and specimens from human beings submitted by                                            
licensed physicians and nurses for analysis;                                                                      
(9)  the regulation of quality and purity of commercially compressed                                                    
oxygen sold for human respiration;                                                                                
(10)  establishing confidentiality and security standards for information                               
and records received under AS 18.15.355 - 18.15.395;                                                          
(11)  implementation of AS 13.55 (Voluntary Nonopioid Directive                                     
Act).                                                                                                         
* Sec. 43. Sections 22, 24, 26, 28, 30, 32, 52, and 73, ch. 25, SLA 2016, are repealed.                            
* Sec. 44. The uncodified law of the State of Alaska is amended by adding a new section to                         
read:                                                                                                                   
TRANSITION: REGULATIONS. (a) The Department of Health and Social Services                                         
may adopt regulations necessary to implement the changes made by secs. 31 and 42 of this                                
Act. The regulations take effect under AS 44.62 (Administrative Procedure Act), but not                                 
before the effective date of the relevant provision of this Act implemented by the regulation.                          
(b)  The Department of Commerce, Community, and Economic Development and a                                              
board that regulates an occupation that includes a practitioner required to register with the                           
controlled substance prescription database under AS 17.30.200 shall adopt regulations to                                
implement the changes made by AS 17.30.200(b), as amended by sec. 34 of this Act, and                                   
AS 17.30.200(r), as amended by sec. 39 of this Act. The regulations take effect under                                   
AS 44.62 (Administrative Procedure Act), but not before the effective date of the relevant                              
provision of secs. 34 and 39 of this Act implemented by the regulation. In this subsection,                             
(1)  "board" has the meaning given in AS 08.01.110;                                                          
(2)  "occupation" has the meaning given in AS 08.01.110;                                                     
(3)  "practitioner" has the meaning given in AS 11.71.900.                                                   
(c)  The Board of Dental Examiners may adopt regulations necessary to implement the                                     
changes made by secs. 1 and 2 of this Act. The regulations take effect under AS 44.62                                   
(Administrative Procedure Act), but not before the effective date of the relevant provision of                          
secs. 1 and 2 of this Act implemented by the regulation.                                                                
(d)  The State Medical Board may adopt regulations necessary to implement the                                           
changes made by secs. 6 - 13 of this Act. The regulations take effect under AS 44.62                                    
(Administrative Procedure Act), but not before the effective date of the relevant provision of                          
secs. 6 - 13 of this Act implemented by the regulation.                                                                 
(e)  The Board of Nursing may adopt regulations necessary to implement the changes                                      
made by secs. 18 and 20 of this Act. The regulations take effect under AS 44.62                                         
(Administrative Procedure Act), but not before the effective date of the relevant provision of                          
secs. 18 and 20 of this Act implemented by the regulation.                                                              
(f)  The Board of Examiners in Optometry may adopt regulations necessary to                                             
implement the changes made by secs. 23 - 25 of this Act. The regulations take effect under                              
AS 44.62 (Administrative Procedure Act), but not before the effective date of the relevant                              
provision of secs. 23 - 25 of this Act implemented by the regulation.                                                   
* Sec. 45. Section 27 of this Act takes effect on the effective date of sec. 12, ch. 25, SLA                       
2016.                                                                                                                   
* Sec. 46. Section 32 of this Act takes effect on the effective date of sec. 21, ch. 25, SLA                       
2016.                                                                                                                   
* Sec. 47. Section 33 of this Act takes effect on the effective date of sec. 23, ch. 25, SLA                       
2016.                                                                                                                   
* Sec. 48. Section 35 of this Act takes effect on the effective date of sec. 25, ch. 25, SLA                       
2016.                                                                                                                   
* Sec. 49. Section 36 of this Act takes effect on the effective date of sec. 27, ch. 25, SLA                       
2016.                                                                                                                   
* Sec. 50. Sections 37 and 38 of this Act take effect on the effective date of sec. 34, ch. 25,                    
SLA 2016.                                                                                                               
* Sec. 51. Section 41 of this Act takes effect on the effective date of secs. 21 and 23, ch. 25,                   
SLA 2016.                                                                                                               
* Sec. 52. Section 1, 2, 6 - 13, 18, 20, 23 - 25, 34, and 39 of this Act take effect July 1,                       
2018.                                                                                                                   
* Sec. 53. Sections 31 and 42 of this Act take effect July 1, 2019.                                                
* Sec. 54. Except as provided in secs. 45 - 53 of this Act, this Act takes effect immediately                      
under AS 01.10.070(c).                                                                                                  