SENATE BILL NO. 160                                                                         
"An Act relating to the regulation of broadband Internet; and making certain actions by                                 
broadband Internet service providers unlawful acts or practices under the Alaska                                        
Unfair Trade Practices and Consumer Protection Act."                                                                    
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF ALASKA:                                                                
* Section 1. AS 42.05 is amended by adding a new section to read:                                                  
Sec. 42.05.147. Internet neutrality. (a) A utility that provides broadband                                            
Internet access services in the state shall publicly disclose accurate information                                      
regarding the network management practices, performance, and commercial terms of                                        
the utility's broadband Internet access service in a manner sufficient for                                        
(1)  consumers to make informed choices regarding use of Internet                                       
services and for content, application, and service; and                                                           
(2)  edge providers to develop, market, and maintain Internet offerings.                                
(b)  A utility that provides broadband Internet access service in the state may                              
not                                                                                                               
(1)  block lawful content, applications, services, or nonharmful devices,                               
subject to reasonable network management;                                                                         
(2)  impair or degrade lawful Internet traffic based on Internet content,                               
application, or service, or the use of a nonharmful device, subject to reasonable                                 
network management;                                                                                               
(3)  in exchange for compensation or to benefit an affiliated entity,                                                   
manage the utility's network to favor, directly or indirectly, certain Internet traffic over                            
other Internet traffic, including the use of traffic shaping, prioritization, resource                                  
reservation, or other forms of preferential traffic management;                                                   
(4)  unreasonably interfere with or unreasonably disadvantage the                                                       
ability of                                                                                                        
(A)  an end user to select, access, or use broadband Internet                                                           
access service or lawful Internet content, applications, services, or devices of                                        
the end user's choice; or                                                                                    
(B)  an edge provider to make lawful content, applications,                                                             
services, or devices available to an end user.                                                               
(c)  The commission may waive the prohibition in (b)(3) of this section                                      
(1)  if a utility demonstrates that the preferential traffic management                                                 
would benefit the public interest and would not negatively affect the open nature of                                    
Internet in the state;                                                                                            
(2)  to favor Internet-based education; or                                                              
(3)  to favor telemedicine services.                                                                    
(d)  In this section,                                                                                        
(1)  "broadband Internet access service" means a                                                        
(A)  mass-market retail service by wire or radio that provides                                                          
the ability to transmit data to and from all or substantially all Internet                                              
endpoints, including a capability that is incidental to and enables the operation                                       
of the communications service, but excluding dial-up Internet access service;                                           
or                                                                                                           
(B)  service that the Federal Communications Commission                                                                 
determines provides a functional equivalent of the service described in (A) of                                          
this paragraph, or that is used to evade the protections under this section;                                 
(2)  "edge provider" means an individual or entity that provides                                        
(A)  content or an application or service over the Internet; or                                    
(B)  a device used to access content or an application or service                                  
over the Internet;                                                                                           
(3)  "end user" means an individual or entity that uses a broadband                                     
Internet access service.                                                                                          
* Sec. 2. AS 45.50.471(b) is amended by adding a new paragraph to read:                                            
(58)  violating AS 42.05.147 (Internet neutrality).                                                     