SENATE BILL NO. 161                                                                         
"An Act relating to the licensure of dentists."                                                                         
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF ALASKA:                                                                
* Section 1. AS 08.36.100 is amended to read:                                                                      
Sec. 08.36.100. License required. Except as provided in AS 08.36.238 and                               
08.36.254, a person may not practice, or attempt to practice, dentistry without a                             
license.                                                                                                        
* Sec. 2. AS 08.36 is amended by adding a new section to article 2 to read:                                        
Sec. 08.36.254. Temporary permit to substitute for an incapacitated                                        
dentist. (a) The board may issue a temporary permit to practice dentistry to a dentist                          
for the purpose of substituting for an incapacitated dentist licensed in this state.                              
(b)  A dentist applying for a temporary permit under (a) of this section shall                               
(1)  meet the requirements of AS 08.36.234, except the board may                                        
waive the proof of continued competence requirement; and                                                          
(2)  pay the required fee.                                                                              
(c)  A temporary permit issued under this section is valid only to treat patients                            
of the incapacitated dentist at an address listed on the business license of the                                  
incapacitated dentist.                                                                                            
(d)  The fee for a permit issued under this section is one-fourth of the fee for a                           
biennial license plus the appropriate application fee.                                                            
(e)  The board may not issue a temporary permit under this section if another                                
dentist licensed under this chapter may reasonably substitute for the incapacitated                               
dentist.                                                                                                          
(f)  A temporary permit issued under this section is initially valid for 90                                  
consecutive calendar days. Upon request of a permittee, the board shall extend a                                  
permit issued under this section for 60 calendar days if, before the expiration of the                                  
initial 90-day permit, the permittee submits to the board a completed application form                                  
and the fee required under this chapter, except that the board may refuse to grant a                                    
request for an extension for the same reasons the board may revoke a license under                                      
AS 08.36.315. Permits and extensions of permits issued to a permittee under this                                        
section are not valid for more than 240 calendar days during any consecutive 24                                         
months.                                                                                                           
(g)  The board may extend a permit issued under this section for a period that                                          
exceeds the limit established in (f) of this section if the board determines that the                                   
extension is necessary to provide essential dental services and the board has received a                          
(1)  clearance report from the National Practitioner Data Bank;                                         
(2)  clearance report from the United States Drug Enforcement                                                           
Administration; and                                                                                               
(3)  completed application form and the fee required for licensure under                                                
this chapter.                                                                                                     
(h)  In this section, "incapacitated" means impaired by a health condition that                                         
renders a dentist unable to practice dentistry for more than 30 days.                                             