CONCERNING
RELATED TO CEMETERIES FROM TITLE 12, COLORADO REVISED
STATUTES, AS PART OF THE ORGANIZATIONAL RECODIFICATION
OF TITLE 12.
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Colorado:
SECTION 1. In Colorado Revised Statutes, add with amended
and relocated provisions article 23 to title 6 as follows:
ARTICLE 23
Cemeteries
6-23-101. [Formerly 12-12-101] Definitions. As used in this
article ARTICLE 23, unless the context otherwise requires:
(1) "Burial memorial" means any type of gravestone, tombstone,
headstone, memorial, monument, or marker that commemorates the
permanent disposition of the remains of a human body either below or
above the surface of the ground.
(1.5) (2) "Cemetery" means any place, including a mausoleum, in
which there is provided space either below or above the surface of the
ground for the interment of the remains of human bodies. "Cemetery"
does not include a cemetery that is owned, operated, or maintained by a
government or governmental agency, by a church or synagogue, by a
labor organization, by a cooperative association as defined in section
7-55-101, C.R.S., by a corporation organized and operated exclusively for
religious purposes, or by a fraternal society, order, or association
operating under the lodge system and exempt from the payment of state
income tax and that has as its main business something other than the
ownership, operation, or maintenance of any business connected with the
burial of the dead.
(2) (3)   "Cemetery authority" means any person who owns,
maintains, or operates a cemetery.
(2.5) Repealed.
(3) (4) "Endowment care cemetery" means any cemetery, the
authority of which does, or represents to the public that it does, collect
funds for the purpose of caring for, maintaining, or embellishing the
cemetery to preserve it from becoming unkempt or a place of reproach
and desolation. It does not include a cemetery which is owned, operated,
or maintained by a government or governmental agency, by a church, by
a labor organization, by a cooperative association as defined in section
7-55-101, C.R.S., by a corporation organized and operated exclusively for
religious purposes, or by a fraternal society, order, or association
operating under the lodge system and exempt from the payment of state
income tax and which has as its main purpose something other than the
ownership, operation, or maintenance of any business connected with
burial of the dead.
(4) (5) "Grave space" means any space in the ground for the
interment of the remains of a human body.
(4.5) (6) "Inscription" means any words or symbols on a burial
memorial.
(5) (7) "Interment" means the permanent disposition of the
remains of a deceased person by cremation, inurnment, entombment, or
burial.
(6) (8) "Niche" or "crypt" means a space in any structure above
the ground for the interment of the remains of a human body.
(7) (9) "Nonendowment care cemetery" means any cemetery other
than an endowment care cemetery.
(8) (10) "Person" means a person as defined by section 2-4-401
(8). C.R.S.
6-23-102. [Formerly 12-12-103] Organization as endowment
care cemetery - when. Any person who, after July 1, 1965, establishes
or acquires a cemetery within twenty miles from the exterior boundary of
any city with a population of five thousand or more, according to the
latest federal decennial census, shall be organized as an endowment care
cemetery.
6-23-103. [Formerly 12-12-104] Nonendowment section in
endowment care cemetery. Any cemetery authority of an endowment
care cemetery which THAT has a nonendowed section that is used only as
single graves for indigents may continue to donate said THE graves for the
burial of indigents. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent a
cemetery authority of an endowed care cemetery from donating such a
grave space for the burial of an indigent person without placing money in
the endowment care fund for such THE space.
6-23-104. [Formerly 12-12-105] Acquisition of land. Any
cemetery authority may acquire suitable and sufficient land for a cemetery
in a manner provided by articles 1 to 7 of title 38. C.R.S.
6-23-105. [Formerly 12-12-106] Plats of land to be recorded.
Any cemetery authority shall cause its land or such THE portion thereof
as may become necessary for that purpose to be surveyed into blocks,
lots, avenues, and walks and platted. The plat of ground as surveyed shall
be acknowledged by some officer of the cemetery authority and filed for
record in the office of the clerk and recorder of the county in which the
land is situated. Each block or lot shall be regularly numbered by the
surveyor, and such THE numbers shall be marked on the plat.
6-23-106. [Formerly 12-12-109] Endowment care fund. (1) A
cemetery authority of an endowment care cemetery shall establish an
irrevocable endowment care fund for each endowment care cemetery
owned, maintained, or operated by it in a state bank or trust company
authorized to act as fiduciary and under the supervision of the banking
board or in a national banking association authorized to act as fiduciary
or in a state or federally chartered savings and loan association authorized
to act as a fiduciary. Such THE endowment care fund shall be invested in
investments lawful for trustees, which shall not include investments in
nor mortgages on property owned or contracted for by the cemetery
authority or any owned or affiliated company.
(2) (a) A cemetery authority of an endowment care cemetery shall
make deposits in the endowment care fund or, if it operates more than one
endowment care fund, in the appropriate endowment care fund, in
accordance with one of the following plans:
(I) Plan A:
It shall deposit in such THE fund not more than thirty days after any
sale is completed at least fifteen percent of the sales price of any grave
space and at least ten percent of the sales price of any crypt or niche, and
in case any sale has not been completed within sixty months after date of
first payment, it shall deposit in such THE fund, not later than one month
after the sixtieth month, at least fifteen percent of the sales price of any
grave space and at least ten percent of the sales price of any crypt or
niche. A sale is completed at the time the final payment is made and no
balance remains due to the cemetery authority, whether or not a deed has
been issued. If a contract of sale is rewritten, the date of the first payment
under the original contract of sale shall be the date of first payment under
the rewritten contract of sale.
(II) Plan B:
It shall deposit, not later than thirty days after the end of the fiscal
year in which such     THE   payments are received, fifteen percent of all
payments received on account of the sale of any grave space and at least
ten percent of all payments received on account of the sale of a niche or
crypt. This deposit requirement applies to all uncompleted sales contracts
which THAT carry an endowment care provision.
(III) Plan C: (applicable only to sale of niches or crypts in a
mausoleum)
It shall deposit in its endowment care fund for such               THE
mausoleum, not later than thirteen months after the end of its fiscal year
in which any sale is completed, at least ten percent of the sale price of any
niche or crypt, and in case any sale has not been completed within
twenty-four months after date of first payment, it shall deposit in such
THE fund, not later than one month after the end of its fiscal year in which
the last day of such   THE   twenty-four month period occurs, at least ten
percent of the sales price of any niche or crypt. A sale is completed at the
time the final payment is made and no balance remains due to the
cemetery authority, whether or not a deed has been issued. If a contract
of sale is rewritten, the date of first payment under the original contract
of sale shall be the date of first payment under the rewritten contract of
sale.
(b) As to any endowment care cemetery in operation on July 1,
1965, this subsection (2) shall only apply to all sales contracts entered
into on or after said THE date.
(3) (a) The cemetery authority of an endowment care cemetery,
before commencing operation, on or after July 1, 1965, shall have on
deposit in the endowment care fund a sum in accordance with the
following scale:
For 10,000 or less population . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $10,000
For more than 10,000 but less than 20,000
population . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $15,000
For 20,000 but less than 25,000 population . . . . . . . . . $20,000
For 25,000 or more population . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $25,000
(b) "Population" means the people residing within a twenty-mile
radius of the location of the endowment care cemetery, the population
figure to be taken from the latest federal decennial census.
(c) The cemetery authority for such THE endowment care cemetery
shall thereafter make deposits in accordance with subsection (2) of this
section. When such THE deposits have reached twice the amount stated in
the above table, the cemetery authority may withdraw the sum of the
initial deposit in amounts equal to the amounts deposited thereafter until
the initial deposit has been withdrawn.
(4) A cemetery authority of a nonendowment care cemetery which
converts to operation as an endowment care cemetery on or after July 1,
1965, shall deposit in its endowment care fund the sum of ten thousand
dollars before making any further sale of any grave space or niche or
crypt. The cemetery authority for such THE cemetery shall thereafter make
deposits in accordance with subsection (2) of this section until total
deposits into the endowment care fund have reached twenty thousand
dollars. It may thereafter withdraw from the initial ten thousand dollar
deposit amounts equal to the amounts of deposits thereafter made until
the entire ten thousand dollar initial deposit has been withdrawn and
replaced by deposits in accordance with subsection (2) of this section.
(5) The cemetery authority of an endowment care cemetery that
constructs foundations for the setting of markers or memorials and
receives payment for the care of such THE markers or memorials as part
of the cost of foundation construction, setting charges, or itemized
endowment requirements shall deposit all of said THE care payments in
their irrevocable endowment care fund not later than one month after the
end of its fiscal year in which such THE payments are received.
(6) The cemetery authority of an endowment care cemetery shall
keep in its principal office a copy of the report referred to in section
12-12-110 SECTION 6-23-107, which shall be available to any grave space,
niche, or crypt owner or his    OR HER     duly authorized representative for
inspection and study.
(7) The endowment care fund, for all purposes, shall constitute a
nonprofit irrevocable trust fund. Endowment care is a provision for the
benefit and protection of the public by preserving and keeping cemeteries
from becoming unkempt and places of reproach and desolation in the
communities in which they are situated. The income and increments and
gains from such    THE   funds are for the benefit of the public for the
purposes provided for in such THE trusts.
6-23-107. [Formerly 12-12-110] Reports. (1) Each cemetery
authority shall keep on file annually, within three months after the end of
its fiscal year, a written report setting forth:
(a) The total amount deposited in the endowment care fund, listing
separately the total amounts paid for endowment of grave spaces, for
niches, and for crypts, in accordance with the provisions of section
12-12-109 SECTION 6-23-106;
(b) The total amount of endowment care funds invested in each of
the investments authorized by law and the amount of cash on hand not
invested;
(c)   Any other facts necessary to show the actual financial
condition of the fund; and
(d) The total number of interments and entombments for the
preceding year.
(2) Each such report shall be verified by the owner or by the
president or the vice-president and one other officer of the cemetery
authority and shall be attested to by the accountant, auditor, or other
person preparing the same.
(3) (Deleted by amendment, L. 92, p. 1606, ยง 149, effective May
20, 1992.)
6-23-108. [Formerly 12-12-113] Delivery of copy of contract -
required. A duplicate original of any contract entered into between a
purchaser of any lot, grave space, interment right, niche, or crypt and any
cemetery authority shall be given to the buyer at the time both parties
become bound by the contract and any consideration whatsoever is given
by the buyer and retained pursuant to the contract by the cemetery
authority.
6-23-109. [Formerly 12-12-113.5] Burial memorial - changes
- notice of ownership. (1) No person other than the owner of a burial
memorial or a person authorized by the owner of the burial memorial
shall make a change to the inscription on such THE burial memorial.
(2) If a burial memorial is to be placed at a grave space, niche, or
crypt that is purchased on or after July 1, 2004, the cemetery authority
shall give written notice to the purchaser of the grave space, niche, or
crypt of who shall be the owner of such     THE   burial memorial and, as
owner, who shall be entitled to make or authorize a change to the
inscription on such THE burial memorial.
(3) Any person violating the provisions of subsection (1) of this
section commits the crime of defacing property as defined in section
18-4-509 (1)(b). C.R.S.
6-23-110. [Formerly 12-12-114] Discrimination. There shall be
no limitation, restriction, or covenant based upon race, color, sex, sexual
orientation, marital status, disability, national origin, or ancestry on the
size, placement, location, sale, or transfer of any cemetery grave space,
niche, or crypt or in the interment of a deceased person.
6-23-111. [Formerly 12-12-115] Violations - penalties. (1) It is
unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell a grave space, niche, or
crypt upon the promise, representation, or inducement of resale at a
financial profit.
(2) (Deleted by amendment, L. 92, p. 1607, ยง 152, effective May
20, 1992.)
(3) (2) Any person who violates any provision of this article is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in
the county jail for not more than one year, or by both such A fine and
imprisonment. Whenever any person has reason to believe that any person
is liable to punishment under this article, such THE person may certify the
facts to the district attorney of the judicial district in which the alleged
violation occurred who shall cause appropriate proceedings to be brought.
(4) (Deleted by amendment, L. 92, p. 1607, ยง 152, effective May
20, 1992.)
6-23-112. [Formerly 12-12-116] Abandoned graves - right to
reclaim. (1) If there is a lot, grave space, niche, or crypt in a cemetery in
which no remains have been interred, no burial memorial has been placed,
and no other improvement has been made for a continuous period of no
less than seventy-five years, a cemetery authority may initiate the process
of reclaiming title to the lot, grave space, niche, or crypt in accordance
with this section.
(2) A cemetery authority seeking to reclaim a lot, grave space,
niche, or crypt shall:
(a) Send written notice of the cemetery authority's intent to
reclaim title to the lot, grave space, niche, or crypt to the owner's
last-known address by first-class mail; and
(b) Publish a notice of the cemetery authority's intent to reclaim
title to the lot, grave space, niche, or crypt in a newspaper of general
circulation in the area in which the cemetery is located once per week for
four weeks.
(3) The notice required by subsection (2) of this section shall
clearly indicate that the cemetery authority intends to terminate the
owner's rights and title to the lot, grave space, niche, or crypt and include
a recitation of the owner's right to notify the cemetery authority of the
owner's intent to retain ownership of the lot, grave space, niche, or crypt.
(4) If the cemetery authority does not receive from the owner of
the lot, grave space, niche, or crypt a letter of intent to retain ownership
of the lot, grave space, niche, or crypt within sixty days after the last
publication of the notice required by paragraph (b) of subsection (2)
SUBSECTION    (2)(b) of this section, all rights and title to the lot, grave
space, niche, or crypt shall transfer to the cemetery authority. The
cemetery authority may then sell, transfer, or otherwise dispose of the lot,
grave space, niche, or crypt without risk of liability to the prior owner of
the lot, grave space, niche, or crypt.
(5) A cemetery authority that reclaims title to a lot, grave space,
niche, or crypt in accordance with this section shall retain in its records
for no less than one year a copy of the notice sent pursuant to paragraph
(a) of subsection (2) SUBSECTION (2)(a) of this section and a copy of the
notice published pursuant to paragraph (b) of subsection (2) SUBSECTION
(2)(b) of this section.
(6) If a person submits to a cemetery authority a legitimate claim
to a lot, grave space, niche, or crypt that the cemetery authority has
reclaimed pursuant to this section, the cemetery authority shall transfer to
the person at no charge a lot, grave space, niche, or crypt that, to the
extent possible, is equivalent to the reclaimed lot, grave space, niche, or
crypt.
(7) Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, on and
after August 7, 2006, a cemetery authority shall not convey title to the real
property surveyed as a lot in a cemetery for use as a burial space. A
cemetery authority may grant interment rights to a lot, grave space, niche,
or crypt in a cemetery.
SECTION 2. In Colorado Revised Statutes, 7-47-101, amend
(1.5)(b) as follows:
7-47-101.     Who may organize - powers. (1.5) (b)             This
subsection (1.5) applies only to cemeteries as defined in section
12-12-101 (1.5), C.R.S. SECTION 6-23-101 (2).
SECTION 3. In Colorado Revised Statutes, 38-1-202, amend (2)
introductory portion and (2)(d) as follows:
38-1-202. Governmental entities, corporations, and persons
authorized to use eminent domain. (2)             The following types of
corporations and persons, in accordance with all procedural and other
requirements specified in this article and articles 2 to 7 of this title TITLE
38 and to the extent and within any time frame specified in the applicable
authorizing provision of the state constitution or statute may exercise the
power of eminent domain:
(d) A cemetery authority, as defined in section 12-12-101 (2),
C.R.S. SECTION 6-23-101 (3), as authorized in section 12-12-105, C.R.S.
SECTION 6-23-104;
SECTION 4. Repeal of relocated provisions in this act. In
Colorado Revised Statutes, repeal article 12 of title 12.
SECTION 5. Act subject to petition - effective date. This act
takes effect at 12:01 a.m. on the day following the expiration of the
ninety-day period after final adjournment of the general assembly (August
9, 2017, if adjournment sine die is on May 10, 2017); except that, if a
referendum petition is filed pursuant to section 1 (3) of article V of the
state constitution against this act or an item, section, or part of this act
within such period, then the act, item, section, or part will not take effect
unless approved by the people at the general election to be held in
November 2018 and, in such case, will take effect on the date of the
official declaration of the vote thereon by the governor.