A bill to be entitled                      
An act relating to school district capital outlay
funding; amending s. 1011.71, F.S.; increasing the
millage school boards are authorized to levy for
school purposes upon a specified vote; providing
requirements for the distribution of such funds to
charter schools; amending s. 1013.738, F.S.;
conforming a provision to changes made by the act;
providing for construction of the act in pari materia
with laws enacted during the 2017 Regular Session of
the Legislature; providing an effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:

Section 1. Subsections (2) and (3) of section 1011.71,
Florida Statutes, are amended, and subsection (10) is added to
that section, to read:
1011.71 District school tax.—
(2) In addition to the maximum millage levy as provided in
subsection (1), each school board may levy not more than 2.0 1.5
mills against the taxable value for school purposes for district
schools, including charter schools at the discretion of the
school board. If the school board chooses to raise the millage
above 1.5 mills, such a decision must be made by a two-thirds
vote of its members. The tax revenues from the levy may be used,
to fund:
(a) New construction and remodeling projects, as set forth
in s. 1013.64(3)(b) and (6)(b) and included in the district’s
educational plant survey pursuant to s. 1013.31, without regard
to prioritization, sites and site improvement or expansion to
new sites, existing sites, auxiliary facilities, athletic
facilities, or ancillary facilities.
(b) Maintenance, renovation, and repair of existing school
plants or of leased facilities to correct deficiencies pursuant
to s. 1013.15(2).
(c) The purchase, lease-purchase, or lease of school buses.
(d) The purchase, lease-purchase, or lease of new and
replacement equipment; computer hardware, including electronic
hardware and other hardware devices necessary for gaining access
to or enhancing the use of electronic content and resources or
to facilitate the access to and the use of a school district’s
digital classrooms plan pursuant to s. 1011.62, excluding
software other than the operating system necessary to operate
the hardware or device; and enterprise resource software
applications that are classified as capital assets in accordance
with definitions of the Governmental Accounting Standards Board,
have a useful life of at least 5 years, and are used to support
districtwide administration or state-mandated reporting
requirements.
(e) Payments for educational facilities and sites due under
a lease-purchase agreement entered into by a district school
board pursuant to s. 1003.02(1)(f) or s. 1013.15(2), not
exceeding, in the aggregate, an amount equal to three-fourths of
the proceeds from the millage levied by a district school board
pursuant to this subsection. The three-fourths limit is waived
for lease-purchase agreements entered into before June 30, 2009,
by a district school board pursuant to this paragraph.
(f) Payment of loans approved pursuant to ss. 1011.14 and
1011.15.
(g) Payment of costs directly related to complying with
state and federal environmental statutes, rules, and regulations
governing school facilities.
(h) Payment of costs of leasing relocatable educational
facilities, of renting or leasing educational facilities and
sites pursuant to s. 1013.15(2), or of renting or leasing
buildings or space within existing buildings pursuant to s.
1013.15(4).
(i) Payment of the cost of school buses when a school
district contracts with a private entity to provide student
transportation services if the district meets the requirements
of this paragraph.
1. The district’s contract must require that the private
entity purchase, lease-purchase, or lease, and operate and
maintain, one or more school buses of a specific type and size
that meet the requirements of s. 1006.25.
2. Each such school bus must be used for the daily
transportation of public school students in the manner required
by the school district.
3. Annual payment for each such school bus may not exceed
10 percent of the purchase price of the state pool bid.
4. The proposed expenditure of the funds for this purpose
must have been included in the district school board’s notice of
proposed tax for school capital outlay as provided in s.
200.065(10).
(j) Payment of the cost of the opening day collection for
the library media center of a new school.
(3) Notwithstanding subsection (2), if the revenue from 2.0
1.5 mills is insufficient to meet the payments due under a
lease-purchase agreement entered into before June 30, 2009, by a
district school board pursuant to paragraph (2)(e), or to meet
other critical district fixed capital outlay needs, the board,
in addition to the 2.0 1.5 mills, may levy up to 0.25 mills for
fixed capital outlay in lieu of levying an equivalent amount of
the discretionary mills for operations as provided in the
General Appropriations Act. Millage levied pursuant to this
subsection is subject to the provisions of s. 200.065 and,
combined with the 2.0 1.5 mills authorized in subsection (2),
may not exceed 2.25 1.75 mills. If the district chooses to use
up to 0.25 mills for fixed capital outlay, the compression
adjustment pursuant to s. 1011.62(5) shall be calculated for the
standard discretionary millage that is not eligible for transfer
to capital outlay.
(10) If a school board chooses to share with charter
schools in the school district a portion of the levied millage
authorized under subsection (2), all of the following
requirements must be met:
(a) A charter school’s total capital outlay funding
allocation may not exceed one-eighth of the discretionary
millage value.
(b) The chair of the governing board and the chief
administrative officer of the charter school that receives such
funds shall annually certify under oath that the funds will be
used solely and exclusively for constructing, renovating, or
improving charter school facilities that are:
1. Owned by a school district, political subdivision of the
state, municipality, Florida College System institution, or
state university; or
2. Owned by an organization, qualified as an exempt
organization under s. 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code,
whose articles of incorporation specify that upon the
organization’s dissolution, the subject property will be
transferred to a school district, political subdivision of the
state, municipality, Florida College System institution, or
state university.
Section 2. Paragraph (a) of subsection (2) of section
1013.738, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
1013.738 High Growth District Capital Outlay Assistance
Grant Program.—
(2) In order to qualify for a grant, a school district must
meet the following criteria:
(a) The district must have levied the full 2.0 1.5 mills of
nonvoted discretionary capital outlay millage authorized in s.
1011.71(2) for each of the past 4 fiscal years.
Section 3. If any law amended by this act was also amended
by a law enacted during the 2017 Regular Session of the
Legislature, such laws shall be construed as if they had been
enacted during the same session of the Legislature and full
effect shall be given to each if possible.
Section 4. This act shall take effect July 1, 2017, or upon
becoming a law, whichever occurs later.