A bill to be entitled                      
An act relating to medical use of marijuana; providing
legislative intent; amending s. 212.08, F.S.;
providing an exemption from the state tax on sales,
use, and other transactions for marijuana and
marijuana delivery devices used for medical purposes;
providing for expiration of the exemption; amending s.
381.986, F.S.; providing, revising, and deleting
definitions; providing qualifying medical conditions
for a patient to be eligible to receive marijuana or a
marijuana delivery device; providing requirements for
designating a qualified physician or medical director;
providing criteria for certification of a patient for
medical marijuana treatment by a qualified physician;
providing for certain patients registered with the
medical marijuana use registry to be deemed qualified;
requiring the Department of Health to monitor
physician registration and certifications in the
medical marijuana use registry; requiring the Board of
Medicine and the Board of Osteopathic Medicine to
create a physician certification pattern review panel;
providing rulemaking authority to the department and
the boards; requiring the department to establish a
medical marijuana use registry; specifying entities
and persons who have access to the registry; providing
requirements for registration of, and maintenance of
registered status by, qualified patients and
caregivers; providing criteria for nonresidents to
prove residency for registration as a qualified
patient; defining the term “seasonal resident”;
authorizing the department to suspend or revoke the
registration of a patient or caregiver under certain
circumstances; providing requirements for the issuance
of medical marijuana use registry identification
cards; requiring the department to issue licenses to a
certain number of medical marijuana treatment centers;
providing for license renewal and revocation;
providing conditions for change of ownership;
providing for continuance of certain entities
authorized to dispense low-THC cannabis, medical
cannabis, and cannabis delivery devices; requiring a
medical marijuana treatment center to comply with
certain standards in the production and distribution
of edibles; requiring the department to establish,
maintain, and control a computer seed-to-sale
marijuana tracking system; requiring background
screening of owners, officers, board members, and
managers of medical marijuana treatment centers;
requiring the department to establish protocols and
procedures for operation, conduct periodic
inspections, and restrict location of medical
marijuana treatment centers; providing a limit on
county and municipal permit fees; authorizing counties
and municipalities to determine the location of
medical marijuana treatment centers by ordinance under
certain conditions; providing penalties; authorizing
the department to impose sanctions on persons or
entities engaging in unlicensed activities; providing
that a person is not exempt from prosecution for
certain offenses and is not relieved from certain
requirements of law under certain circumstances;
providing for certain school personnel to possess
marijuana pursuant to certain established policies and
procedures; providing that certain research
institutions may possess, test, transport, and dispose
of marijuana subject to certain conditions; providing
applicability; amending ss. 458.331 and 459.015, F.S.;
providing additional acts by a physician or an
osteopathic physician which constitute grounds for
denial of a license or disciplinary action to which
penalties apply; creating s. 381.988, F.S.; providing
for the establishment of medical marijuana testing
laboratories; requiring the Department of Health, in
collaboration with the Department of Agriculture and
Consumer Services and the Department of Environmental
Protection, to develop certification standards and
rules; providing limitations on the acquisition and
distribution of marijuana by a testing laboratory;
providing an exception for transfer of marijuana under
certain conditions; requiring a testing laboratory to
use a department-selected computer tracking system;
providing grounds for disciplinary and administrative
action; authorizing the department to refuse to issue
or renew, or suspend or revoke, a testing laboratory
license; creating s. 381.989, F.S.; defining terms;
directing the department and the Department of Highway
Safety and Motor Vehicles to institute public
education campaigns relating to cannabis and marijuana
and impaired driving; requiring evaluations of public
education campaigns; authorizing the department and
the Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles to
contract with vendors to implement and evaluate the
campaigns; amending ss. 385.211, 499.0295, and 893.02,
F.S.; conforming provisions to changes made by the
act; creating s. 1004.4351, F.S.; providing a short
title; providing legislative findings; defining terms;
establishing the Coalition for Medical Marijuana
Research and Education within the H. Lee Moffitt
Cancer Center and Research Institute, Inc.; providing
a purpose for the coalition; establishing the Medical
Marijuana Research and Education Board to direct the
operations of the coalition; providing for the
appointment of board members; providing for terms of
office, reimbursement for certain expenses, and
meetings of the board; authorizing the board to
appoint a coalition director; prescribing the duties
of the coalition director; requiring the board to
advise specified entities and officials regarding
medical marijuana research and education in this
state; requiring the board to annually adopt a Medical
Marijuana Research and Education Plan; providing
requirements for the plan; requiring the board to
issue an annual report to the Governor and the
Legislature by a specified date; requiring the
Department of Health to submit reports to the board
containing specified data; specifying responsibilities
of the H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Inc.; amending s. 1004.441, F.S.; revising
definition; amending s. 1006.062, F.S.; requiring
district school boards to adopt policies and
procedures for access to medical marijuana by
qualified patients who are students; providing
emergency rulemaking authority; providing for venue
for a cause of action against the department;
providing for defense against certain causes of
action; directing the Department of Law Enforcement to
develop training for law enforcement officers and
agencies; amending s. 385.212, F.S.; renaming the
department’s Office of Compassionate Use; providing
severability; providing a directive to the Division of
Law Revision and Information; providing
appropriations; providing an effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:

Section 1. Legislative intent.—It is the intent of the
Legislature to implement s. 29, Article X of the State
Constitution by creating a unified regulatory structure. If s.
29, Article X of the State Constitution is amended or a
constitutional amendment related to cannabis or marijuana is
adopted, this act shall expire 6 months after the effective date
of such amendment.
Section 2. Present paragraph (l) of subsection (2) of
section 212.08, Florida Statutes, is redesignated as paragraph
(m), and a new paragraph (l) is added to that subsection, to
read:
212.08 Sales, rental, use, consumption, distribution, and
storage tax; specified exemptions.—The sale at retail, the
rental, the use, the consumption, the distribution, and the
storage to be used or consumed in this state of the following
are hereby specifically exempt from the tax imposed by this
chapter.
(2) EXEMPTIONS; MEDICAL.—
(l) Marijuana and marijuana delivery devices, as defined in
s. 381.986, are exempt from the taxes imposed under this
chapter.
Section 3. Section 381.986, Florida Statutes, is amended to
read:
(Substantial rewording of section. See
s. 381.986, F.S., for present text.)
381.986 Medical use of marijuana.—
(1) DEFINITIONS.—As used in this section, the term:
(a) “Caregiver” means a resident of this state who has
agreed to assist with a qualified patient’s medical use of
marijuana, has a caregiver identification card, and meets the
requirements of subsection (6).
(b) “Chronic nonmalignant pain” means pain that is caused
by a qualifying medical condition or that originates from a
qualifying medical condition and persists beyond the usual
course of that qualifying medical condition.
(c) “Close relative” means a spouse, parent, sibling,
grandparent, child, or grandchild, whether related by whole or
half blood, by marriage, or by adoption.
(d) “Edibles” means commercially produced food items made
with marijuana oil, but no other form of marijuana, that are
produced and dispensed by a medical marijuana treatment center.
(e) “Low-THC cannabis” means a plant of the genus Cannabis,
the dried flowers of which contain 0.8 percent or less of
tetrahydrocannabinol and more than 10 percent of cannabidiol
weight for weight; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from
any part of such plant; or any compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant or its seeds
or resin that is dispensed from a medical marijuana treatment
center.
(f) “Marijuana” means all parts of any plant of the genus
Cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin
extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the
plant or its seeds or resin, including low-THC cannabis, which
are dispensed from a medical marijuana treatment center for
medical use by a qualified patient.
(g) “Marijuana delivery device” means an object used,
intended for use, or designed for use in preparing, storing,
ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana into the
human body, and which is dispensed from a medical marijuana
treatment center for medical use by a qualified patient.
(h) “Marijuana testing laboratory” means a facility that
collects and analyzes marijuana samples from a medical marijuana
treatment center and has been certified by the department
pursuant to s. 381.988.
(i) “Medical director” means a person who holds an active,
unrestricted license as an allopathic physician under chapter
458 or osteopathic physician under chapter 459 and is in
compliance with the requirements of paragraph (3)(c).
(j) “Medical use” means the acquisition, possession, use,
delivery, transfer, or administration of marijuana authorized by
a physician certification. The term does not include:
1. Possession, use, or administration of marijuana that was
not purchased or acquired from a medical marijuana treatment
center.
2. Possession, use, or administration of marijuana in a
form for smoking, in the form of commercially produced food
items other than edibles, or of marijuana seeds or flower,
except for flower in a sealed, tamper-proof receptacle for
vaping.
3. Use or administration of any form or amount of marijuana
in a manner that is inconsistent with the qualified physician’s
directions or physician certification.
4. Transfer of marijuana to a person other than the
qualified patient for whom it was authorized or the qualified
patient’s caregiver on behalf of the qualified patient.
5. Use or administration of marijuana in the following
locations:
a. On any form of public transportation, except for low-THC
cannabis.
b. In any public place, except for low-THC cannabis.
c. In a qualified patient’s place of employment, except
when permitted by his or her employer.
d. In a state correctional institution, as defined in s.
944.02, or a correctional institution, as defined in s. 944.241.
e. On the grounds of a preschool, primary school, or
secondary school, except as provided in s. 1006.062.
f. In a school bus, a vehicle, an aircraft, or a motorboat,
except for low-THC cannabis.
(k) “Physician certification” means a qualified physician’s
authorization for a qualified patient to receive marijuana and a
marijuana delivery device from a medical marijuana treatment
center.
(l) “Qualified patient” means a resident of this state who
has been added to the medical marijuana use registry by a
qualified physician to receive marijuana or a marijuana delivery
device for a medical use and who has a qualified patient
identification card.
(m) “Qualified physician” means a person who holds an
active, unrestricted license as an allopathic physician under
chapter 458 or as an osteopathic physician under chapter 459 and
is in compliance with the physician education requirements of
subsection (3).
(n) “Smoking” means burning or igniting a substance and
inhaling the smoke.
(o) “Terminal condition” means a progressive disease or
medical or surgical condition that causes significant functional
impairment, is not considered by a treating physician to be
reversible without the administration of life-sustaining
procedures, and will result in death within 1 year after
diagnosis if the condition runs its normal course.
(2) QUALIFYING MEDICAL CONDITIONS.—A patient must be
diagnosed with at least one of the following conditions to
qualify to receive marijuana or a marijuana delivery device:
(a) Cancer.
(b) Epilepsy.
(c) Glaucoma.
(d) Positive status for human immunodeficiency virus.
(e) Acquired immune deficiency syndrome.
(f) Post-traumatic stress disorder.
(g) Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
(h) Crohn’s disease.
(i) Parkinson’s disease.
(j) Multiple sclerosis.
(k) Medical conditions of the same kind or class as or
comparable to those enumerated in paragraphs (a)-(j).
(l) A terminal condition diagnosed by a physician other
than the qualified physician issuing the physician
certification.
(m) Chronic nonmalignant pain.
(3) QUALIFIED PHYSICIANS AND MEDICAL DIRECTORS.—
(a) Before being approved as a qualified physician, as
defined in paragraph (1)(m), and before each license renewal, a
physician must successfully complete a 2-hour course and
subsequent examination offered by the Florida Medical
Association or the Florida Osteopathic Medical Association which
encompass the requirements of this section and any rules adopted
hereunder. The course and examination shall be administered at
least annually and may be offered in a distance learning format,
including an electronic, online format that is available upon
request. The price of the course may not exceed $500. A
physician who has met the physician education requirements of
former s. 381.986(4), Florida Statutes 2016, before the
effective date of this section, shall be deemed to be in
compliance with this paragraph from the effective date of this
act until 90 days after the course and examination required by
this paragraph become available.
(b) A qualified physician may not be employed by, or have
any direct or indirect economic interest in, a medical marijuana
treatment center or marijuana testing laboratory.
(c) Before being employed as a medical director, as defined
in paragraph (1)(i), and before each license renewal, a medical
director must successfully complete a 2-hour course and
subsequent examination offered by the Florida Medical
Association or the Florida Osteopathic Medical Association which
encompass the requirements of this section and any rules adopted
hereunder. The course and examination shall be administered at
least annually and may be offered in a distance learning format,
including an electronic, online format that is available upon
request. The price of the course may not exceed $500.
(4) PHYSICIAN CERTIFICATION.—
(a) A qualified physician may issue a physician
certification only if the qualified physician:
1. Conducted a physical examination while physically
present in the same room as the patient and a full assessment of
the medical history of the patient.
2. Diagnosed the patient with at least one qualifying
medical condition.
3. Determined that the medical use of marijuana would
likely outweigh the potential health risks for the patient, and
such determination must be documented in the patient’s medical
record. If a patient is younger than 18 years of age, a second
physician must concur with this determination, and such
concurrence must be documented in the patient’s medical record.
4. Determined whether the patient is pregnant and
documented such determination in the patient’s medical record. A
physician may not issue a physician certification, except for
low-THC cannabis, to a patient who is pregnant.
5. Reviewed the patient’s controlled drug prescription
history in the prescription drug monitoring program database
established pursuant to s. 893.055.
6. Reviews the medical marijuana use registry and confirmed
that the patient does not have an active physician certification
from another qualified physician.
7. Registers as the issuer of the physician certification
for the named qualified patient on the medical marijuana use
registry in an electronic manner determined by the department,
and:
a. Enters into the registry the contents of the physician
certification, including the patient’s qualifying condition and
the dosage not to exceed the daily dose amount determined by the
department, the amount and forms of marijuana authorized for the
patient, and any types of marijuana delivery devices needed by
the patient for the medical use of marijuana.
b. Updates the registry within 7 days after any change is
made to the original physician certification to reflect such
change.
c. Deactivates the registration of the qualified patient
and the patient’s caregiver when the physician no longer
recommends the medical use of marijuana for the patient.
8. Obtains the voluntary and informed written consent of
the patient for medical use of marijuana each time the qualified
physician issues a physician certification for the patient,
which shall be maintained in the patient’s medical record. The
patient, or the patient’s parent or legal guardian if the
patient is a minor, must sign the informed consent acknowledging
that the qualified physician has sufficiently explained its
content. The qualified physician must use a standardized
informed consent form adopted in rule by the Board of Medicine
and the Board of Osteopathic Medicine, which must include, at a
minimum, information related to:
a. The Federal Government’s classification of marijuana as
a Schedule I controlled substance.
b. The approval and oversight status of marijuana by the
Food and Drug Administration.
c. The current state of research on the efficacy of
marijuana to treat the qualifying conditions set forth in this
section.
d. The potential for addiction.
e. The potential effect that marijuana may have on a
patient’s coordination, motor skills, and cognition, including a
warning against operating heavy machinery, operating a motor
vehicle, or engaging in activities that require a person to be
alert or respond quickly.
f. The potential side effects of marijuana use.
g. The risks, benefits, and drug interactions of marijuana.
h. That the patient’s de-identified health information
contained in the physician certification and medical marijuana
use registry may be used for research purposes.
(b) If a qualified physician issues a physician
certification for a qualified patient diagnosed with a
qualifying medical condition pursuant to paragraph (2)(k), the
physician must submit the following to the applicable board
within 14 days after issuing the physician certification:
1. Documentation supporting the qualified physician’s
opinion that the medical condition is of the same kind or class
as the conditions in paragraphs (2)(a)-(j).
2. Documentation that establishes the efficacy of marijuana
as treatment for the condition.
3. Documentation supporting the qualified physician’s
opinion that the benefits of medical use of marijuana would
likely outweigh the potential health risks for the patient.
4. Any other documentation as required by board rule.

The department must submit such documentation to the Coalition
for Medical Marijuana Research and Education established
pursuant to s. 1004.4351.
(c) A qualified physician may not issue a physician
certification for more than three 70-day supply limits of
marijuana. The department shall quantify by rule a daily dose
amount with equivalent dose amounts for each allowable form of
marijuana dispensed by a medical marijuana treatment center. The
department shall use the daily dose amount to calculate a 70-day
supply.
1. A qualified physician may request an exception to the
daily dose amount limit. The request shall be made
electronically on a form adopted by the department in rule and
must include, at a minimum:
a. The qualified patient’s qualifying medical condition.
b. The dosage and route of administration that was
insufficient to provide relief to the qualified patient.
c. A description of how the patient will benefit from an
increased amount.
d. The minimum daily dose amount of marijuana that would be
sufficient for the treatment of the qualified patient’s
qualifying medical condition.
2. A qualified physician must provide the qualified
patient’s records upon the request of the department.
3. The department shall approve or disapprove the request
within 14 days after receipt of the complete documentation
required by this paragraph. The request shall be deemed approved
if the department fails to act within this time period.
(d) A qualified physician must evaluate an existing
qualified patient at least once every 30 weeks before issuing a
new physician certification. A physician must:
1. Determine if the patient still meets the requirements to
be issued a physician certification under paragraph (a).
2. Identify and document in the qualified patient’s medical
records whether the qualified patient experienced either of the
following related to the medical use of marijuana:
a. An adverse drug interaction with any prescription or
nonprescription medication; or
b. A reduction in the use of, or dependence on, other types
of controlled substances as defined in s. 893.02.
3. Submit a report with the findings required pursuant to
subparagraph 2. to the department. The department shall submit
such reports to the Coalition for Medical Marijuana Research and
Education established pursuant to s. 1004.4351.
(e) An active order for low-THC cannabis or medical
cannabis issued pursuant to former s. 381.986, Florida Statutes
2016, and registered with the compassionate use registry before
the effective date of this section, is deemed a physician
certification, and all patients possessing such orders are
deemed qualified patients until the department begins issuing
medical marijuana use registry identification cards.
(f) The department shall monitor physician registration in
the medical marijuana use registry and the issuance of physician
certifications for practices that could facilitate unlawful
diversion or misuse of marijuana or a marijuana delivery device
and shall take disciplinary action as appropriate.
(g) The Board of Medicine and the Board of Osteopathic
Medicine shall jointly create a physician certification pattern
review panel that shall review all physician certifications
submitted to the medical marijuana use registry. The panel shall
track and report the number of physician certifications and the
qualifying medical conditions, dosage, supply amount, and form
of marijuana certified. The panel shall report the data both by
individual qualified physician and in the aggregate, by county,
and statewide. The physician certification pattern review panel
shall, beginning January 1, 2018, submit an annual report of its
findings and recommendations to the Governor, the President of
the Senate, and the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
(h) The department, the Board of Medicine, and the Board of
Osteopathic Medicine may adopt rules pursuant to ss. 120.536(1)
and 120.54 to implement this subsection.
(5) MEDICAL MARIJUANA USE REGISTRY.—
(a) The department shall create and maintain a secure,
electronic, and online medical marijuana use registry for
physicians, patients, and caregivers as provided under this
section. The medical marijuana use registry must be accessible
to law enforcement agencies, qualified physicians, and medical
marijuana treatment centers to verify the authorization of a
qualified patient or a caregiver to possess marijuana or a
marijuana delivery device and record the marijuana or marijuana
delivery device dispensed. The medical marijuana use registry
must also be accessible to practitioners licensed to prescribe
prescription drugs to ensure proper care for patients before
medications that may interact with the medical use of marijuana
are prescribed. The medical marijuana use registry must prevent
an active registration of a qualified patient by multiple
physicians.
(b) The department shall determine whether an individual is
a resident of this state for the purpose of registration of
qualified patients and caregivers in the medical marijuana use
registry. To prove residency:
1. An adult resident must provide the department with a
copy of his or her valid Florida driver license issued under s.
322.18 or a copy of a valid Florida identification card issued
under s. 322.051.
2. An adult seasonal resident who cannot meet the
requirements of subparagraph 1. may provide the department with
a copy of two of the following that show proof of residential
address:
a. A deed, mortgage, monthly mortgage statement, mortgage
payment booklet or residential rental or lease agreement.
b. One proof of residential address from the seasonal
resident’s parent, step-parent, legal guardian or other person
with whom the seasonal resident resides and a statement from the
person with whom the seasonal resident resides stating that the
seasonal resident does reside with him or her.
c. A utility hookup or work order dated within 60 days
before registration in the medical use registry.
d. A utility bill, not more than 2 months old.
e. Mail from a financial institution, including checking,
savings, or investment account statements, not more than 2
months old.
f. Mail from a federal, state, county, or municipal
government agency, not more than 2 months old.
g. Any other documentation that provides proof of
residential address as determined by department rule.
3. A minor must provide the department with a certified
copy of a birth certificate or a current record of registration
from a Florida K-12 school and must have a parent or legal
guardian who meets the requirements of subparagraph 1.

For the purposes of this paragraph, the term “seasonal resident”
means any person who temporarily resides in this state for a
period of at least 31 consecutive days in each calendar year,
maintains a temporary residence in this state, returns to the
state or jurisdiction of his or her residence at least one time
during each calendar year, and is registered to vote or pays
income tax in another state or jurisdiction.
(c) The department may suspend or revoke the registration
of a qualified patient or caregiver if the qualified patient or
caregiver:
1. Provides misleading, incorrect, false, or fraudulent
information to the department;
2. Obtains a supply of marijuana in an amount greater than
the amount authorized by the physician certification;
3. Falsifies, alters, or otherwise modifies an
identification card;
4. Fails to timely notify the department of any changes to
his or her qualified patient status; or
5. Violates the requirements of this section or any rule
adopted under this section.
(d) The department shall immediately suspend the
registration of a qualified patient charged with a violation of
chapter 893 until final disposition of any alleged offense.
Thereafter, the department may extend the suspension, revoke the
registration, or reinstate the registration.
(e) The department shall immediately suspend the
registration of any caregiver charged with a violation of
chapter 893 until final disposition of any alleged offense. The
department shall revoke a caregiver registration if the
caregiver does not meet the requirements of subparagraph
(6)(b)6.
(f) The department may revoke the registration of a
qualified patient or caregiver who cultivates marijuana or who
acquires, possesses, or delivers marijuana from any person or
entity other than a medical marijuana treatment center.
(g) The department shall revoke the registration of a
qualified patient, and the patient’s associated caregiver, upon
notification that the patient no longer meets the criteria of a
qualified patient.
(h) The department may adopt rules pursuant to ss.
120.536(1) and 120.54 to implement this subsection.
(6) CAREGIVERS.—
(a) The department must register an individual as a
caregiver on the medical marijuana use registry and issue a
caregiver identification card if an individual designated by a
qualified patient meets all of the requirements of this
subsection and department rule.
(b) A caregiver must:
1. Not be a qualified physician and not be employed by or
have an economic interest in a medical marijuana treatment
center or a marijuana testing laboratory.
2. Be 21 years of age or older and a resident of this
state.
3. Agree in writing to assist with the qualified patient’s
medical use of marijuana.
4. Be registered in the medical marijuana use registry as a
caregiver for no more than one qualified patient, except as
provided in this paragraph.
5. Successfully complete a caregiver certification course
developed and administered by the department or its designee,
which must be renewed biennially. The price of the course may
not exceed $100.
6. Pass a background screening pursuant to subsection (9),
unless the patient is a close relative of the caregiver.
(c) A qualified patient may designate no more than one
caregiver to assist with the qualified patient’s medical use of
marijuana, unless:
1. The qualified patient is a minor and the designated
caregivers are parents or legal guardians of the qualified
patient;
2. The qualified patient is an adult who has an
intellectual or developmental disability that prevents the
patient from being able to protect or care for himself or
herself without assistance or supervision and the designated
caregivers are the parents or legal guardians of the qualified
patient; or
3. The qualified patient is admitted to a hospice program.
(d) A caregiver may be registered in the medical marijuana
use registry as a designated caregiver for no more than one
qualified patient, unless:
1. The caregiver is a parent or legal guardian of more than
one minor who is a qualified patient;
2. The caregiver is a parent or legal guardian of more than
one adult who is a qualified patient and who has an intellectual
or developmental disability that prevents the patient from being
able to protect or care for himself or herself without
assistance or supervision; or
3. All qualified patients the caregiver has agreed to
assist are admitted to a hospice program and have requested the
assistance of that caregiver with the medical use of marijuana;
the caregiver is an employee of the hospice; and the caregiver
provides personal care or other services directly to clients of
the hospice in the scope of that employment.
(e) A caregiver may not receive compensation, other than
actual expenses incurred, for any services provided to the
qualified patient.
(f) If a qualified patient is younger than 18 years of age,
only a caregiver may purchase or administer marijuana for
medical use by the qualified patient. The qualified patient may
not purchase marijuana.
(g) A caregiver must be in immediate possession of his or
her medical marijuana use registry identification card at all
times when in possession of marijuana or a marijuana delivery
device and must present his or her medical marijuana use
registry identification card upon the request of a law
enforcement officer.
(h) The department may adopt rules pursuant to ss.
120.536(1) and 120.54 to implement this subsection.
(7) IDENTIFICATION CARDS.—
(a) The department shall issue medical marijuana use
registry identification cards for qualified patients and
caregivers who are residents of this state, which must be
renewed annually. The identification cards must be resistant to
counterfeiting and tampering and must include, at a minimum, the
following:
1. The name, address, and date of birth of the qualified
patient or caregiver.
2. A full-face, passport-type, color photograph of the
qualified patient or caregiver taken within the 90 days
immediately preceding registration or the Florida driver license
or Florida identification card photograph of the qualified
patient or caregiver obtained directly from the Department of
Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles.
3. Identification as a qualified patient or a caregiver.
4. The unique numeric identifier used for the qualified
patient in the medical marijuana use registry.
5. For a caregiver, the name and unique numeric identifier
of the caregiver and the qualified patient or patients that the
caregiver is assisting.
6. The expiration date of the identification card.
(b) The department must receive written consent from a
qualified patient’s parent or legal guardian before it may issue
an identification card to a qualified patient who is a minor.
(c) The department shall adopt rules pursuant to ss.
120.536(1) and 120.54 establishing procedures for the issuance,
renewal, suspension, replacement, surrender, and revocation of
medical marijuana use registry identification cards pursuant to
this section and shall begin issuing qualified patient
identification cards by October 3, 2017.
(d) Applications for identification cards must be submitted
on a form prescribed by the department. The department may
charge a reasonable fee associated with the issuance,
replacement, and renewal of identification cards. The department
shall allocate $10 of the identification card fee to the
Division of Research at Florida Agricultural and Mechanical
University for the purpose of educating minorities about
marijuana for medical use and the impact of the unlawful use of
marijuana on minority communities. The department may contract
with a third-party vendor to issue identification cards. The
vendor selected by the department must have experience
performing similar functions for other state agencies.
(e) A qualified patient or caregiver shall return his or
her identification card to the department within 5 business days
after revocation.
(8) MEDICAL MARIJUANA TREATMENT CENTERS.—
(a) The department shall license medical marijuana
treatment centers to ensure reasonable statewide accessibility
and availability as necessary for qualified patients registered
in the medical marijuana use registry and who are issued a
physician certification under this section.
1. As soon as practicable, but no later than July 3, 2017,
the department shall license as a medical marijuana treatment
center any entity that holds an active, unrestricted license to
cultivate, process, transport, and dispense low-THC cannabis,
medical cannabis, and cannabis delivery devices, under former s.
381.986, Florida Statutes 2016, before July 1, 2017, and which
meets the requirements of this section. In addition to the
authority granted under this section, these entities are
authorized to dispense low-THC cannabis, medical cannabis, and
cannabis delivery devices ordered pursuant to former s. 381.986,
Florida Statutes 2016, which were entered into the compassionate
use registry before July 1, 2017, and are authorized to begin
dispensing marijuana under this section on July 3, 2017. The
department may grant variances from the representations made in
such an entity’s original application for approval under former
s. 381.986, Florida Statutes 2014, pursuant to paragraph (e).
2. The department shall license as medical marijuana
treatment centers 10 applicants that meet the requirements of
this section, under the following parameters:
a. As soon as practicable, but no later than August 1,
2017, the department shall license any applicant whose
application was reviewed, evaluated, and scored by the
department and which was denied a dispensing organization
license by the department under former s. 381.986, Florida
Statutes 2014; which had one or more administrative or judicial
challenges pending as of January 1, 2017, or had a final ranking
within one point of the highest final ranking in its region
under former s. 381.986, Florida Statutes 2014; which meets the
requirements of this section; and which provides documentation
to the department that it has the existing infrastructure and
technical and technological ability to begin cultivating
marijuana within 30 days after registration as a medical
marijuana treatment center.
b. As soon as practicable, but no later than October 3,
2017, the department shall license one applicant that is a
recognized class member of Pigford v. Glickman, 185 F.R.D. 82
(D.D.C. 1999), or In Re Black Farmers Litig., 856 F. Supp. 2d 1
(D.D.C. 2011) and is a member of the Black Farmers and
Agriculturalists Association-Florida Chapter. An applicant
licensed under this sub-subparagraph is exempt from the
requirements of subparagraphs (b)1. and (b)2.
c. As soon as practicable, but no later than October 3,
2017, the department shall license applicants that meet the
requirements of this section in sufficient numbers to result in
10 total licenses issued under this subparagraph, while
accounting for the number of licenses issued under sub
subparagraphs a. and b.
3. For up to two of the licenses issued under subparagraph
2., the department shall give preference to applicants that
demonstrate in their applications that they own one or more
facilities that are, or were, used for the canning,
concentrating, or otherwise processing of citrus fruit or citrus
molasses and will use or convert the facility or facilities for
the processing of marijuana.
4. Within 6 months after the registration of 100,000 active
qualified patients in the medical marijuana use registry, the
department shall license four additional medical marijuana
treatment centers that meet the requirements of this section.
Thereafter, the department shall license four medical marijuana
treatment centers within 6 months after the registration of each
additional 100,000 active qualified patients in the medical
marijuana use registry that meet the requirements of this
section.
5. Dispensing facilities are subject to the following
requirements:
a. A medical marijuana treatment center may not establish
or operate more than a statewide maximum of 25 dispensing
facilities, unless the medical marijuana use registry reaches a
total of 100,000 active registered qualified patients. When the
medical marijuana use registry reaches 100,000 active registered
qualified patients, and then upon each further instance of the
total active registered qualified patients increasing by
100,000, the statewide maximum number of dispensing facilities
that each licensed medical marijuana treatment center may
establish and operate increases by five.
b. A medical marijuana treatment center may not establish
more than the maximum number of dispensing facilities allowed in
each of the Northwest, Northeast, Central, Southwest, and
Southeast Regions. The department shall determine a medical
marijuana treatment center’s maximum number of dispensing
facilities allowed in each region by calculating the percentage
of the total statewide population contained within that region
and multiplying that percentage by the medical marijuana
treatment center’s statewide maximum number of dispensing
facilities established under sub-subparagraph a., rounded to the
nearest whole number. The department shall ensure that such
rounding does not cause a medical marijuana treatment center’s
total number of statewide dispensing facilities to exceed its
statewide maximum. The department shall initially calculate the
maximum number of dispensing facilities allowed in each region
for each medical marijuana treatment center using county
population estimates from the Florida Estimates of Population
2016, as published by the Office of Economic and Demographic
Research, and shall perform recalculations following the
official release of county population data resulting from each
United States Decennial Census. For the purposes of this
subparagraph:
(I) The Northwest Region consists of Bay, Calhoun,
Escambia, Franklin, Gadsden, Gulf, Holmes, Jackson, Jefferson,
Leon, Liberty, Madison, Okaloosa, Santa Rosa, Taylor, Wakulla,
Walton, and Washington Counties.
(II) The Northeast Region consists of Alachua, Baker,
Bradford, Clay, Columbia, Dixie, Duval, Flagler, Gilchrist,
Hamilton, Lafayette, Levy, Marion, Nassau, Putnam, St. Johns,
Suwannee, and Union Counties.
(III) The Central Region consists of Brevard, Citrus,
Hardee, Hernando, Indian River, Lake, Orange, Osceola, Pasco,
Pinellas, Polk, Seminole, St. Lucie, Sumter, and Volusia
Counties.
(IV) The Southwest Region consists of Charlotte, Collier,
DeSoto, Glades, Hendry, Highlands, Hillsborough, Lee, Manatee,
Okeechobee, and Sarasota Counties.
(V) The Southeast Region consists of Broward, Miami-Dade,
Martin, Monroe, and Palm Beach Counties.
c. If a medical marijuana treatment center establishes a
number of dispensing facilities within a region that is less
than the number allowed for that region under sub-subparagraph
b., the medical marijuana treatment center may sell one or more
of its unused dispensing facility slots to other licensed
medical marijuana treatment centers. For each dispensing
facility slot that a medical marijuana treatment center sells,
that medical marijuana treatment center’s statewide maximum
number of dispensing facilities, as determined under sub
subparagraph a., is reduced by one. The statewide maximum number
of dispensing facilities for a medical marijuana treatment
center that purchases an unused dispensing facility slot is
increased by one per slot purchased. Additionally, the sale of a
dispensing facility slot shall reduce the seller’s regional
maximum and increase the purchaser’s regional maximum number of
dispensing facilities, as determined in sub-subparagraph b., by
one for that region. For any slot purchased under this sub
subparagraph, the regional restriction applied to that slot’s
location under sub-subparagraph b. before the purchase shall
remain in effect following the purchase. A medical marijuana
treatment center that sells or purchases a dispensing facility
slot must notify the department within 3 days of sale.
d. This subparagraph shall expire on April 1, 2020.

If this subparagraph or its application to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions or applications of this act which can be given
effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this
end, the provisions of this subparagraph are severable.
(b) An applicant for licensure as a medical marijuana
treatment center shall apply to the department on a form
prescribed by the department and adopted in rule. The department
shall adopt rules pursuant to ss. 120.536(1) and 120.54
establishing a procedure for the issuance and biennial renewal
of licenses, including initial application and biennial renewal
fees sufficient to cover the costs of implementing and
administering this section and ss. 381.989 and 1004.4351. The
department shall identify applicants with strong diversity plans
reflecting this state’s commitment to diversity and implement
training programs and other educational programs to enable
minority persons and minority business enterprises, as defined
in s. 288.703, and veteran business enterprises, as defined in
s. 295.187, to compete for medical marijuana treatment center
licensure and contracts. Subject to the requirements in
subparagraphs (a)2.-4., the department shall issue a license to
an applicant if the applicant meets the requirements of this
section and pays the initial application fee. The department
shall renew the licensure of a medical marijuana treatment
center biennially if the licensee meets the requirements of this
section and pays the biennial renewal fee. An individual may not
be an applicant, owner, officer, board member, or manager on
more than one application for licensure as a medical marijuana
treatment center. An individual or entity may not be awarded
more than one license as a medical marijuana treatment center.
An applicant for licensure as a medical marijuana treatment
center must demonstrate:
1. That, for the 5 consecutive years before submitting the
application, the applicant has been registered to do business in
in the state.
2. Possession of a valid certificate of registration issued
by the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services pursuant
to s. 581.131.
3. The technical and technological ability to cultivate and
produce marijuana, including, but not limited to, low-THC
cannabis.
4. The ability to secure the premises, resources, and
personnel necessary to operate as a medical marijuana treatment
center.
5. The ability to maintain accountability of all raw
materials, finished products, and any byproducts to prevent
diversion or unlawful access to or possession of these
substances.
6. An infrastructure reasonably located to dispense
marijuana to registered qualified patients statewide or
regionally as determined by the department.
7. The financial ability to maintain operations for the
duration of the 2-year approval cycle, including the provision
of certified financial statements to the department.
a. Upon approval, the applicant must post a $5 million
performance bond issued by an authorized surety insurance
company rated in one of the three highest rating categories by a
nationally recognized rating service. However, a medical
marijuana treatment center serving at least 1,000 qualified
patients is only required to maintain a $2 million performance
bond.
b. In lieu of the performance bond required under sub
subparagraph a., the applicant may provide an irrevocable letter
of credit payable to the department or provide cash to the
department. If provided with cash under this sub-subparagraph,
the department shall deposit the cash with the state treasury
for safekeeping. If the deposited funds generate interest, the
amount of the interest shall be annually transferred to the
department for the administration of this section.
8. That all owners, officers, board members, and managers
have passed a background screening pursuant to subsection (9).
9. The employment of a medical director to supervise the
activities of the medical marijuana treatment center.
10. A diversity plan that promotes and ensures the
involvement of minority persons and minority business
enterprises, as defined in s. 288.703, or veteran business
enterprises, as defined in s. 295.187, in ownership, management,
and employment. An applicant for licensure renewal must show the
effectiveness of the diversity plan by including the following
with his or her application for renewal:
a. Representation of minority persons and veterans in the
medical marijuana treatment center’s workforce;
b. Efforts to recruit minority persons and veterans for
employment; and
c. A record of contracts for services with minority
business enterprises and veteran business enterprises.
(c) A medical marijuana treatment center may not make a
wholesale purchase of marijuana from, or a distribution of
marijuana to, another medical marijuana treatment center, unless
the medical marijuana treatment center seeking to make a
wholesale purchase of marijuana submits proof of harvest failure
to the department.
(d) The department shall establish, maintain, and control a
computer software tracking system that traces marijuana from
seed to sale and allows real-time, 24-hour access by the
department to data from all medical marijuana treatment centers
and marijuana testing laboratories. The tracking system must
allow for integration of other seed-to-sale systems and, at a
minimum, include notification of when marijuana seeds are
planted, when marijuana plants are harvested and destroyed, and
when marijuana is transported, sold, stolen, diverted, or lost.
Each medical marijuana treatment center shall use the seed-to
sale tracking system established by the department or integrate
its own seed-to-sale tracking system with the seed-to-sale
tracking system established by the department. Each medical
marijuana treatment center may use its own seed-to-sale system
until the department establishes a seed-to-sale tracking system.
The department may contract with a vendor to establish the seed
to-sale tracking system. The vendor selected by the department
may not have a contractual relationship with the department to
perform any services pursuant to this section other than the
seed-to-sale tracking system. The vendor may not have a direct
or indirect financial interest in a medical marijuana treatment
center or a marijuana testing laboratory.
(e) A licensed medical marijuana treatment center shall
cultivate, process, transport, and dispense marijuana for
medical use. A licensed medical marijuana treatment center may
not contract for services directly related to the cultivation,
processing, and dispensing of marijuana or marijuana delivery
devices, except that a medical marijuana treatment center
licensed pursuant to subparagraph (a)1. may contract with a
single entity for the cultivation, processing, transporting, and
dispensing of marijuana and marijuana delivery devices. A
licensed medical marijuana treatment center must, at all times,
maintain compliance with the criteria demonstrated and
representations made in the initial application and the criteria
established in this subsection. Upon request, the department may
grant a medical marijuana treatment center a variance from the
representations made in the initial application. Consideration
of such a request shall be based upon the individual facts and
circumstances surrounding the request. A variance may not be
granted unless the requesting medical marijuana treatment center
can demonstrate to the department that it has a proposed
alternative to the specific representation made in its
application which fulfills the same or a similar purpose as the
specific representation in a way that the department can
reasonably determine will not be a lower standard than the
specific representation in the application. A variance may not
be granted from the requirements in subparagraph 2. and
subparagraphs (b)1. and 2.
1. A licensed medical marijuana treatment center may
transfer ownership to an individual or entity who meets the
requirements of this section. A publicly traded corporation or
publicly traded company that meets the requirements of this
section is not precluded from ownership of a medical marijuana
treatment center. To accommodate a change in ownership:
a. The licensed medical marijuana treatment center shall
notify the department in writing at least 60 days before the
anticipated date of the change of ownership.
b. The individual or entity applying for initial licensure
due to a change of ownership must submit an application that
must be received by the department at least 60 days before the
date of change of ownership.
c. Upon receipt of an application for a license, the
department shall examine the application and, within 30 days
after receipt, notify the applicant in writing of any apparent
errors or omissions and request any additional information
required.
d. Requested information omitted from an application for
licensure must be filed with the department within 21 days after
the department’s request for omitted information or the
application shall be deemed incomplete and shall be withdrawn
from further consideration and the fees shall be forfeited.

Within 30 days after the receipt of a complete application, the
department shall approve or deny the application.
2. A medical marijuana treatment center, and any individual
or entity who directly or indirectly owns, controls, or holds
with power to vote 5 percent or more of the voting shares of a
medical marijuana treatment center, may not acquire direct or
indirect ownership or control of any voting shares or other form
of ownership of any other medical marijuana treatment center.
3. A medical marijuana treatment center may not enter into
any form of profit-sharing arrangement with the property owner
or lessor of any of its facilities where cultivation,
processing, storing, or dispensing of marijuana and marijuana
delivery devices occurs.
4. All employees of a medical marijuana treatment center
must be 21 years of age or older and have passed a background
screening pursuant to subsection (9).
5. Each medical marijuana treatment center must adopt and
enforce policies and procedures to ensure employees and
volunteers receive training on the legal requirements to
dispense marijuana to qualified patients.
6. When growing marijuana, a medical marijuana treatment
center:
a. May use pesticides determined by the department, after
consultation with the Department of Agriculture and Consumer
Services, to be safely applied to plants intended for human
consumption, but may not use pesticides designated as
restricted-use pesticides pursuant to s. 487.042.
b. Must grow marijuana within an enclosed structure and in
a room separate from any other plant.
c. Must inspect seeds and growing plants for plant pests
that endanger or threaten the horticultural and agricultural
interests of the state in accordance with chapter 581 and any
rules adopted thereunder.
d. Must perform fumigation or treatment of plants, or
remove and destroy infested or infected plants, in accordance
with chapter 581 and any rules adopted thereunder.
7. Each medical marijuana treatment center must produce and
make available for purchase at least one low-THC cannabis
product.
8. A medical marijuana treatment center that produces
edibles must hold a permit to operate as a food establishment
pursuant to chapter 500, the Florida Food Safety Act, and must
comply with all the requirements for food establishments
pursuant to chapter 500 and any rules adopted thereunder.
Edibles may not contain more than 200 milligrams of
tetrahydrocannabinol and a single serving portion of an edible
may not exceed 10 milligrams of tetrahydrocannabinol. Edibles
may have a potency variance of no greater than 15 percent.
Edibles may not be attractive to children; be manufactured in
the shape of humans, cartoons, or animals; be manufactured in a
form that bears any reasonable resemblance to products available
for consumption as commercially available candy; or contain any
color additives. To discourage consumption of edibles by
children, the department shall determine by rule any shapes,
forms, and ingredients allowed and prohibited for edibles.
Medical marijuana treatment centers may not begin processing or
dispensing edibles until after the effective date of the rule.
The department shall also adopt sanitation rules providing the
standards and requirements for the storage, display, or
dispensing of edibles.
9. When processing marijuana, a medical marijuana treatment
center must:
a. Process the marijuana within an enclosed structure and
in a room separate from other plants or products.
b. Not use a hydrocarbon based solvent, such as butane,
hexane, or propane, to extract or separate resin from marijuana.
c. Test the processed marijuana using a medical marijuana
testing laboratory before it is dispensed. Results must be
verified and signed by two medical marijuana treatment center
employees. Before dispensing, the medical marijuana treatment
center must determine that the test results indicate that low
THC cannabis meets the definition of low-THC cannabis, the
concentration of tetrahydrocannabinol meets the potency
requirements of this section, the labeling of the concentration
of tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol is accurate, and all
marijuana is safe for human consumption and free from
contaminants that are unsafe for human consumption. The
department shall determine by rule which contaminants must be
tested for and the maximum levels of each contaminant which are
safe for human consumption. The Department of Agriculture and
Consumer Services shall assist the department in developing the
testing requirements for contaminants that are unsafe for human
consumption in edibles. The department shall also determine by
rule the procedures for the treatment of marijuana that fails to
meet the testing requirements of this section, s. 381.988, or
department rule. The department may select a random sample from
edibles available for purchase in a dispensing facility that
shall be tested by the department to determine that the edible
meets the potency requirements of this section, is safe for
human consumption, and the labeling of the tetrahydrocannabinol
and cannabidiol concentration is accurate. A medical marijuana
treatment center may not require payment from the department for
the sample. A medical marijuana treatment center must recall
edibles, including all edibles made from the same batch of
marijuana, which fail to meet the potency requirements of this
section, which are unsafe for human consumption, or for which
the labeling of the tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol
concentration is inaccurate. The medical marijuana treatment
center must retain records of all testing and samples of each
homogenous batch of marijuana for at least 9 months. The medical
marijuana treatment center must contract with a marijuana
testing laboratory to perform audits on the medical marijuana
treatment center’s standard operating procedures, testing
records, and samples and provide the results to the department
to confirm that the marijuana or low-THC cannabis meets the
requirements of this section and that the marijuana or low-THC
cannabis is safe for human consumption. A medical marijuana
treatment center shall reserve two processed samples from each
batch and retain such samples for at least 9 months for the
purpose of such audits. A medical marijuana treatment center may
use a laboratory that has not been certified by the department
under s. 381.988 until such time as at least one laboratory
holds the required certification, but in no event later than
July 1, 2018.
d. Package the marijuana in compliance with the United
States Poison Prevention Packaging Act of 1970, 15 U.S.C. ss.
1471 et seq.
e. Package the marijuana in a receptacle that has a firmly
affixed and legible label stating the following information:
(I) The marijuana or low-THC cannabis meets the
requirements of sub-subparagraph c.
(II) The name of the medical marijuana treatment center
from which the marijuana originates.
(III) The batch number and harvest number from which the
marijuana originates and the date dispensed.
(IV) The name of the physician who issued the physician
certification.
(V) The name of the patient.
(VI) The product name, if applicable, and dosage form,
including concentration of tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol.
The product name may not contain wording commonly associated
with products marketed by or to children.
(VII) The recommended dose.
(VIII) A warning that it is illegal to transfer medical
marijuana to another person.
(IX) A marijuana universal symbol developed by the
department.
10. The medical marijuana treatment center shall include in
each package a patient package insert with information on the
specific product dispensed related to:
a. Clinical pharmacology.
b. Indications and use.
c. Dosage and administration.
d. Dosage forms and strengths.
e. Contraindications.
f. Warnings and precautions.
g. Adverse reactions.
11. Each edible shall be individually sealed in plain,
opaque wrapping marked only with the marijuana universal symbol.
Where practical, each edible shall be marked with the marijuana
universal symbol. In addition to the packaging and labeling
requirements in subparagraphs 9. and 10., edible receptacles
must be plain, opaque, and white without depictions of the
product or images other than the medical marijuana treatment
center’s department-approved logo and the marijuana universal
symbol. The receptacle must also include a list all of the
edible’s ingredients, storage instructions, an expiration date,
a legible and prominent warning to keep away from children and
pets, and a warning that the edible has not been produced or
inspected pursuant to federal food safety laws.
12. When dispensing marijuana or a marijuana delivery
device, a medical marijuana treatment center:
a. May dispense any active, valid order for low-THC
cannabis, medical cannabis and cannabis delivery devices issued
pursuant to former s. 381.986, Florida Statutes 2016, which was
entered into the medical marijuana use registry before July 1,
2017.
b. May not dispense more than a 70-day supply of marijuana
to a qualified patient or caregiver.
c. Must have the medical marijuana treatment center’s
employee who dispenses the marijuana or a marijuana delivery
device enter into the medical marijuana use registry his or her
name or unique employee identifier.
d. Must verify that the qualified patient and the
caregiver, if applicable, each has an active registration in the
medical marijuana use registry and an active and valid medical
marijuana use registry identification card, the amount and type
of marijuana dispensed matches the physician certification in
the medical marijuana use registry for that qualified patient,
and the physician certification has not already been filled.
e. May not dispense marijuana to a qualified patient who is
younger than 18 years of age. If the qualified patient is
younger than 18 years of age, marijuana may only be dispensed to
the qualified patient’s caregiver.
f. May not dispense or sell any other type of cannabis,
alcohol, or illicit drug-related product, including pipes,
bongs, or wrapping papers, other than a marijuana delivery
device required for the medical use of marijuana and which is
specified in a physician certification.
g. Must, upon dispensing the marijuana or marijuana
delivery device, record in the registry the date, time,
quantity, and form of marijuana dispensed; the type of marijuana
delivery device dispensed; and the name and medical marijuana
use registry identification number of the qualified patient or
caregiver to whom the marijuana delivery device was dispensed.
h. Must ensure that patient records are not visible to
anyone other than the qualified patient, his or her caregiver,
and authorized medical marijuana treatment center employees.
(f) To ensure the safety and security of premises where the
cultivation, processing, storing, or dispensing of marijuana
occurs, and to maintain adequate controls against the diversion,
theft, and loss of marijuana or marijuana delivery devices, a
medical marijuana treatment center shall:
1.a. Maintain a fully operational security alarm system
that secures all entry points and perimeter windows and is
equipped with motion detectors; pressure switches; and duress,
panic, and hold-up alarms; and
b. Maintain a video surveillance system that records
continuously 24 hours a day and meets the following criteria:
(I) Cameras are fixed in a place that allows for the clear
identification of persons and activities in controlled areas of
the premises. Controlled areas include grow rooms, processing
rooms, storage rooms, disposal rooms or areas, and point-of-sale
rooms.
(II) Cameras are fixed in entrances and exits to the
premises, which shall record from both indoor and outdoor, or
ingress and egress, vantage points.
(III) Recorded images must clearly and accurately display
the time and date.
(IV) Retain video surveillance recordings for at least 45
days or longer upon the request of a law enforcement agency.
2. Ensure that the medical marijuana treatment center’s
outdoor premises have sufficient lighting from dusk until dawn.
3. Ensure that the indoor premises where dispensing occurs
includes a waiting area with sufficient space and seating to
accommodate qualified patients and caregivers and at least one
private consultation area that is isolated from the waiting area
and area where dispensing occurs. A medical marijuana treatment
center may not display products or dispense marijuana or
marijuana delivery devices in the waiting area.
4. Not dispense from its premises marijuana or a marijuana
delivery device between the hours of 9 p.m. and 7 a.m., but may
perform all other operations and deliver marijuana to qualified
patients 24 hours a day.
5. Store marijuana in a secured, locked room or a vault.
6. Require at least two of its employees, or two employees
of a security agency with whom it contracts, to be on the
premises at all times where cultivation, processing, or storing
of marijuana occurs.
7. Require each employee or contractor to wear a photo
identification badge at all times while on the premises.
8. Require each visitor to wear a visitor pass at all times
while on the premises.
9. Implement an alcohol and drug-free workplace policy.
10. Report to local law enforcement within 24 hours after
the medical marijuana treatment center is notified or becomes
aware of the theft, diversion, or loss of marijuana.
(g) To ensure the safe transport of marijuana and marijuana
delivery devices to medical marijuana treatment centers,
marijuana testing laboratories, or qualified patients, a medical
marijuana treatment center must:
1. Maintain a marijuana transportation manifest in any
vehicle transporting marijuana. The marijuana transportation
manifest must be generated from a medical marijuana treatment
center’s seed-to-sale tracking system and include the:
a. Departure date and approximate time of departure.
b. Name, location address, and license number of the
originating medical marijuana treatment center.
c. Name and address of the recipient of the delivery.
d. Quantity and form of any marijuana or marijuana delivery
device being transported.
e. Arrival date and estimated time of arrival.
f. Delivery vehicle make and model and license plate
number.
g. Name and signature of the medical marijuana treatment
center employees delivering the product.
(I) A copy of the marijuana transportation manifest must be
provided to each individual, medical marijuana treatment center,
or marijuana testing laboratory that receives a delivery. The
individual, or a representative of the center or laboratory,
must sign a copy of the marijuana transportation manifest
acknowledging receipt.
(II) An individual transporting marijuana or a marijuana
delivery device must present a copy of the relevant marijuana
transportation manifest and his or her employee identification
card to a law enforcement officer upon request.
(III) Medical marijuana treatment centers and marijuana
testing laboratories must retain copies of all marijuana
transportation manifests for at least 3 years.
2. Ensure only vehicles in good working order are used to
transport marijuana.
3. Lock marijuana and marijuana delivery devices in a
separate compartment or container within the vehicle.
4. Require employees to have possession of their employee
identification card at all times when transporting marijuana or
marijuana delivery devices.
5. Require at least two persons to be in a vehicle
transporting marijuana or marijuana delivery devices, and
require at least one person to remain in the vehicle while the
marijuana or marijuana delivery device is being delivered.
6. Provide specific safety and security training to
employees transporting or delivering marijuana and marijuana
delivery devices.
(h) A medical marijuana treatment center may not engage in
advertising that is visible to members of the public from any
street, sidewalk, park, or other public place, except:
1. The dispensing location of a medical marijuana treatment
center may have a sign that is affixed to the outside or hanging
in the window of the premises which identifies the dispensary by
the licensee’s business name, a department-approved trade name,
or a department-approved logo. A medical marijuana treatment
center’s trade name and logo may not contain wording or images
commonly associated with marketing targeted toward children or
which promote recreational use of marijuana.
2. A medical marijuana treatment center may engage in
Internet advertising and marketing under the following
conditions:
a. All advertisements must be approved by the department.
b. An advertisement may not have any content that
specifically targets individuals under the age of 18, including
cartoon characters or similar images.
c. An advertisement may not be an unsolicited pop-up
advertisement.
d. Opt-in marketing must include an easy and permanent opt
out feature.
(i) Each medical marijuana treatment center that dispenses
marijuana and marijuana delivery devices shall make available to
the public on its website:
1. Each marijuana and low-THC product available for
purchase, including the form, strain of marijuana from which it
was extracted, cannabidiol content, tetrahydrocannabinol
content, dose unit, total number of doses available, and the
ratio of cannabidiol to tetrahydrocannabinol for each product.
2. The price for a 30-day, 50-day, and 70-day supply at a
standard dose for each marijuana and low-THC product available
for purchase.
3. The price for each marijuana delivery device available
for purchase.
4. If applicable, any discount policies and eligibility
criteria for such discounts.
(j) Medical marijuana treatment centers are the sole source
from which a qualified patient may legally obtain marijuana.
(k) The department may adopt rules pursuant to ss.
120.536(1) and 120.54 to implement this subsection.
(9) BACKGROUND SCREENING.-An individual required to undergo
a background screening pursuant to this section must pass a
level 2 background screening as provided under chapter 435,
which, in addition to the disqualifying offenses provided in s.
435.04, shall exclude an individual who has an arrest awaiting
final disposition for, has been found guilty of, regardless of
adjudication, or has entered a plea of nolo contendere or guilty
to an offense under chapter 837, chapter 895, or chapter 896 or
similar law of another jurisdiction.
(a) Such individual must submit a full set of fingerprints
to the department or to a vendor, entity, or agency authorized
by s. 943.053(13). The department, vendor, entity, or agency
shall forward the fingerprints to the Department of Law
Enforcement for state processing, and the Department of Law
Enforcement shall forward the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau
of Investigation for national processing.
(b) Fees for state and federal fingerprint processing and
retention shall be borne by the individual. The state cost for
fingerprint processing shall be as provided in s. 943.053(3)(e)
for records provided to persons or entities other than those
specified as exceptions therein.
(c) Fingerprints submitted to the Department of Law
Enforcement pursuant to this subsection shall be retained by the
Department of Law Enforcement as provided in s. 943.05(2)(g) and
(h) and, when the Department of Law Enforcement begins
participation in the program, enrolled in the Federal Bureau of
Investigation’s national retained print arrest notification
program. Any arrest record identified shall be reported to the
department.
(10) MEDICAL MARIJUANA TREATMENT CENTER INSPECTIONS;
ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIONS.—
(a) The department shall conduct announced or unannounced
inspections of medical marijuana treatment centers to determine
compliance with this section or rules adopted pursuant to this
section.
(b) The department shall inspect a medical marijuana
treatment center upon receiving a complaint or notice that the
medical marijuana treatment center has dispensed marijuana
containing mold, bacteria, or other contaminant that may cause
or has caused an adverse effect to human health or the
environment.
(c) The department shall conduct at least a biennial
inspection of each medical marijuana treatment center to
evaluate the medical marijuana treatment center’s records,
personnel, equipment, processes, security measures, sanitation
practices, and quality assurance practices.
(d) The Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services and
the department shall enter into an interagency agreement to
ensure cooperation and coordination in the performance of their
obligations under this section and their respective regulatory
and authorizing laws. The department, the Department of Highway
Safety and Motor Vehicles, and the Department of Law Enforcement
may enter into interagency agreements for the purposes specified
in this subsection or subsection (7).
(e) The department shall publish a list of all approved
medical marijuana treatment centers, medical directors, and
qualified physicians on its website.
(f) The department may impose reasonable fines not to
exceed $10,000 on a medical marijuana treatment center for any
of the following violations:
1. Violating this section or department rule.
2. Failing to maintain qualifications for approval.
3. Endangering the health, safety, or security of a
qualified patient.
4. Improperly disclosing personal and confidential
information of the qualified patient.
5. Attempting to procure medical marijuana treatment center
approval by bribery, fraudulent misrepresentation, or extortion.
6. Being convicted or found guilty of, or entering a plea
of guilty or nolo contendere to, regardless of adjudication, a
crime in any jurisdiction which directly relates to the business
of a medical marijuana treatment center.
7. Making or filing a report or record that the medical
marijuana treatment center knows to be false.
8. Willfully failing to maintain a record required by this
section or department rule.
9. Willfully impeding or obstructing an employee or agent
of the department in the furtherance of his or her official
duties.
10. Engaging in fraud or deceit, negligence, incompetence,
or misconduct in the business practices of a medical marijuana
treatment center.
11. Making misleading, deceptive, or fraudulent
representations in or related to the business practices of a
medical marijuana treatment center.
12. Having a license or the authority to engage in any
regulated profession, occupation, or business that is related to
the business practices of a medical marijuana treatment center
suspended, revoked, or otherwise acted against by the licensing
authority of any jurisdiction, including its agencies or
subdivisions, for a violation that would constitute a violation
under Florida law.
13. Violating a lawful order of the department or an agency
of the state, or failing to comply with a lawfully issued
subpoena of the department or an agency of the state.
(g) The department may suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew
a medical marijuana treatment center license if the medical
marijuana treatment center commits any of the violations in
paragraph (f).
(h) The department may adopt rules pursuant to ss.
120.536(1) and 120.54 to implement this subsection.
(11) PREEMPTION.—Regulation of cultivation, processing, and
delivery of marijuana by medical marijuana treatment centers is
preempted to the state except as provided in this subsection.
(a) A medical marijuana treatment center cultivating or
processing facility may not be located within 500 feet of the
real property that comprises a public or private elementary
school, middle school, or secondary school.
(b)1. A county or municipality may, by ordinance, ban
medical marijuana treatment center dispensing facilities from
being located within the boundaries of that county or
municipality. A county or municipality that does not ban
dispensing facilities under this subparagraph may not place
specific limits, by ordinance, on the number of dispensing
facilities that may locate within that county or municipality.
2. A municipality may determine by ordinance the criteria
for the location of, and other permitting requirements that do
not conflict with state law or department rule for, medical
marijuana treatment center dispensing facilities located within
the boundaries of that municipality. A county may determine by
ordinance the criteria for the location of, and other permitting
requirements that do not conflict with state law or department
rule for, all such dispensing facilities located within the
unincorporated areas of that county. Except as provided in
paragraph (c), a county or municipality may not enact ordinances
for permitting or for determining the location of dispensing
facilities which are more restrictive than its ordinances
permitting or determining the locations for pharmacies licensed
under chapter 465. A municipality or county may not charge a
medical marijuana treatment center a license or permit fee in an
amount greater than the fee charged by such municipality or
county to pharmacies. A dispensing facility location approved by
a municipality or county pursuant to former s. 381.986(8)(b),
Florida Statutes 2016, is not subject to the location
requirements of this subsection.
(c) A medical marijuana treatment center dispensing
facility may not be located within 500 feet of the real property
that comprises a public or private elementary school, middle
school, or secondary school unless the county or municipality
approves the location through a formal proceeding open to the
public at which the county or municipality determines that the
location promotes the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the community.
(d) This subsection does not prohibit any local
jurisdiction from ensuring medical marijuana treatment center
facilities comply with the Florida Building Code, the Florida
Fire Prevention Code, or any local amendments to the Florida
Building Code or the Florida Fire Prevention Code.
(12) PENALTIES.—
(a) A qualified physician commits a misdemeanor of the
first degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082 or s.
775.083, if the qualified physician issues a physician
certification for the medical use of marijuana for a patient
without a reasonable belief that the patient is suffering from a
qualifying medical condition.
(b) A person who fraudulently represents that he or she has
a qualifying medical condition to a qualified physician for the
purpose of being issued a physician certification commits a
misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable as provided in s.
775.082 or s. 775.083.
(c) A qualified patient who uses marijuana, not including
low-THC cannabis, or a caregiver who administers marijuana, not
including low-THC cannabis, in plain view of or in a place open
to the general public; in a school bus, a vehicle, an aircraft,
or a boat; or on the grounds of a school except as provided in
s. 1006.062, commits a misdemeanor of the first degree,
punishable as provided in s. 775.082 or s. 775.083.
(d) A qualified patient or caregiver who cultivates
marijuana or who purchases or acquires marijuana from any person
or entity other than a medical marijuana treatment center
violates s. 893.13 and is subject to the penalties provided
therein.
(e)1. A qualified patient or caregiver in possession of
marijuana or a marijuana delivery device who fails or refuses to
present his or her marijuana use registry identification card
upon the request of a law enforcement officer commits a
misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in s.
775.082 or s. 775.083, unless it can be determined through the
medical marijuana use registry that the person is authorized to
be in possession of that marijuana or marijuana delivery device.
2. A person charged with a violation of this paragraph may
not be convicted if, before or at the time of his or her court
or hearing appearance, the person produces in court or to the
clerk of the court in which the charge is pending a medical
marijuana use registry identification card issued to him or her
which is valid at the time of his or her arrest. The clerk of
the court is authorized to dismiss such case at any time before
the defendant’s appearance in court. The clerk of the court may
assess a fee of $5 for dismissing the case under this paragraph.
(f) A caregiver who violates any of the applicable
provisions of this section or applicable department rules, for
the first offense, commits a misdemeanor of the second degree,
punishable as provided in s. 775.082 or s. 775.083 and, for a
second or subsequent offense, commits a misdemeanor of the first
degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082 or s. 775.083.
(g) A qualified physician who issues a physician
certification for marijuana or a marijuana delivery device and
receives compensation from a medical marijuana treatment center
related to the issuance of a physician certification for
marijuana or a marijuana delivery device is subject to
disciplinary action under the applicable practice act and s.
456.072(1)(n).
(h) A person transporting marijuana or marijuana delivery
devices on behalf of a medical marijuana treatment center or
marijuana testing laboratory who fails or refuses to present a
transportation manifest upon the request of a law enforcement
officer commits a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable
as provided in s. 775.082 or s. 775.083.
(i) Persons and entities conducting activities authorized
and governed by this section and s. 381.988 are subject to ss.
456.053, 456.054, and 817.505, as applicable.
(j) A person or entity that cultivates, processes,
distributes, sells, or dispenses marijuana, as defined in s.
29(b)(4), Art. X of the State Constitution, and is not licensed
as a medical marijuana treatment center violates s. 893.13 and
is subject to the penalties provided therein.
(k) A person who manufactures, distributes, sells, gives,
or possesses with the intent to manufacture, distribute, sell,
or give marijuana or a marijuana delivery device that he or she
holds out to have originated from a licensed medical marijuana
treatment center but that is counterfeit commits a felony of the
third degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082, s. 775.083,
or s. 775.084. For the purposes of this paragraph, the term
“counterfeit” means marijuana; a marijuana delivery device; or a
marijuana or marijuana delivery device container, seal, or label
which, without authorization, bears the trademark, trade name,
or other identifying mark, imprint, or device, or any likeness
thereof, of a licensed medical marijuana treatment center and
which thereby falsely purports or is represented to be the
product of, or to have been distributed by, that licensed
medical marijuana treatment facility.
(l) Any person who possesses or manufactures a blank,
forged, stolen, fictitious, fraudulent, counterfeit, or
otherwise unlawfully issued medical marijuana use registry
identification card commits a felony of the third degree,
punishable as provided in s. 775.082, s. 775.083, or s. 775.084.
(13) UNLICENSED ACTIVITY.—
(a) If the department has probable cause to believe that a
person or entity that is not registered or licensed with the
department has violated this section, s. 381.988, or any rule
adopted pursuant to this section, the department may issue and
deliver to such person or entity a notice to cease and desist
from such violation. The department also may issue and deliver a
notice to cease and desist to any person or entity who aids and
abets such unlicensed activity. The issuance of a notice to
cease and desist does not constitute agency action for which a
hearing under s. 120.569 or s. 120.57 may be sought. For the
purpose of enforcing a cease and desist order, the department
may file a proceeding in the name of the state seeking issuance
of an injunction or a writ of mandamus against any person or
entity who violates any provisions of such order.
(b) In addition to the remedies under paragraph (a), the
department may impose by citation an administrative penalty not
to exceed $5,000 per incident. The citation shall be issued to
the subject and must contain the subject’s name and any other
information the department determines to be necessary to
identify the subject, a brief factual statement, the sections of
the law allegedly violated, and the penalty imposed. If the
subject does not dispute the matter in the citation with the
department within 30 days after the citation is served, the
citation shall become a final order of the department. The
department may adopt rules pursuant to ss. 120.536(1) and 120.54
to implement this section. Each day that the unlicensed activity
continues after issuance of a notice to cease and desist
constitutes a separate violation. The department shall be
entitled to recover the costs of investigation and prosecution
in addition to the fine levied pursuant to the citation. Service
of a citation may be made by personal service or by mail to the
subject at the subject’s last known address or place of
practice. If the department is required to seek enforcement of
the cease and desist or agency order, it shall be entitled to
collect attorney fees and costs.
(c) In addition to or in lieu of any other administrative
remedy, the department may seek the imposition of a civil
penalty through the circuit court for any violation for which
the department may issue a notice to cease and desist. The civil
penalty shall be no less than $5,000 and no more than $10,000
for each offense. The court may also award to the prevailing
party court costs and reasonable attorney fees and, in the event
the department prevails, may also award reasonable costs of
investigation and prosecution.
(d) In addition to the other remedies provided in this
section, the department or any state attorney may bring an
action for an injunction to restrain any unlicensed activity or
to enjoin the future operation or maintenance of the unlicensed
activity or the performance of any service in violation of this
section.
(e) The department must notify local law enforcement of
such unlicensed activity for a determination of any criminal
violation of chapter 893.
(14) EXCEPTIONS TO OTHER LAWS.—
(a) Notwithstanding s. 893.13, s. 893.135, s. 893.147, or
any other provision of law, but subject to the requirements of
this section, a qualified patient and the qualified patient’s
caregiver may purchase from a medical marijuana treatment center
for the patient’s medical use a marijuana delivery device and up
to the amount of marijuana authorized in the physician
certification, but may not possess more than a 70-day supply of
marijuana at any given time and all marijuana purchased must
remain in its original packaging.
(b) Notwithstanding s. 893.13, s. 893.135, s. 893.147, or
any other provision of law, but subject to the requirements of
this section, an approved medical marijuana treatment center and
its owners, managers, and employees may manufacture, possess,
sell, deliver, distribute, dispense, and lawfully dispose of
marijuana or a marijuana delivery device as provided in this
section, s. 381.988, and by department rule. For the purposes of
this subsection, the terms “manufacture,” “possession,”
“deliver,” “distribute,” and “dispense” have the same meanings
as provided in s. 893.02.
(c) Notwithstanding s. 893.13, s. 893.135, s. 893.147, or
any other provision of law, but subject to the requirements of
this section, a certified marijuana testing laboratory,
including an employee of a certified marijuana testing
laboratory acting within the scope of his or her employment, may
acquire, possess, test, transport, and lawfully dispose of
marijuana as provided in this section, in s. 381.988, and by
department rule.
(d) A licensed medical marijuana treatment center and its
owners, managers, and employees are not subject to licensure or
regulation under chapter 465 or chapter 499 for manufacturing,
possessing, selling, delivering, distributing, dispensing, or
lawfully disposing of marijuana or a marijuana delivery device,
as provided in this section, s. 381.988, and by department rule.
(e) This subsection does not exempt a person from
prosecution for a criminal offense related to impairment or
intoxication resulting from the medical use of marijuana or
relieve a person from any requirement under law to submit to a
breath, blood, urine, or other test to detect the presence of a
controlled substance.
(f) Notwithstanding s. 893.13, s. 893.135, s. 893.147, or
any other provision of law, but subject to the requirements of
this section and pursuant to policies and procedures established
pursuant to s. 1006.62(8), school personnel may possess
marijuana that is obtained for medical use pursuant to this
section by a student who is a qualified patient.
(g) Notwithstanding s. 893.13, s. 893.135, s. 893.147, or
any other provision of law, but subject to the requirements of
this section, a research institute established by a public
postsecondary educational institution, such as the H. Lee
Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Inc., established
under s. 1004.43, or a state university that has achieved the
preeminent state research university designation under s.
1001.7065 may possess, test, transport, and lawfully dispose of
marijuana for research purposes as provided by this section.
(15) APPLICABILITY.—This section does not limit the ability
of an employer to establish, continue, or enforce a drug-free
workplace program or policy. This section does not require an
employer to accommodate the medical use of marijuana in any
workplace or any employee working while under the influence of
marijuana. This section does not create a cause of action
against an employer for wrongful discharge or discrimination.
Marijuana, as defined in this section, is not reimbursable under
chapter 440.
(16) FINES AND FEES.—Fines and fees collected by the
department under this section shall be deposited in the Grants
and Donations Trust Fund within the Department of Health.
Section 4. Paragraph (uu) is added to subsection (1) of
section 458.331, Florida Statutes, to read:
458.331 Grounds for disciplinary action; action by the
board and department.—
(1) The following acts constitute grounds for denial of a
license or disciplinary action, as specified in s. 456.072(2):
(uu) Issuing a physician certification, as defined in s.
381.986, in a manner out of compliance with the requirements of
that section and rules adopted thereunder.
Section 5. Paragraph (ww) is added to subsection (1) of
section 459.015, Florida Statutes, to read:
459.015 Grounds for disciplinary action; action by the
board and department.—
(1) The following acts constitute grounds for denial of a
license or disciplinary action, as specified in s. 456.072(2):
(ww) Issuing a physician certification, as defined in s.
381.986, in a manner not in compliance with the requirements of
that section and rules adopted thereunder.
Section 6. Section 381.988, Florida Statutes, is created to
read:
381.988 Medical marijuana testing laboratories; marijuana
tests conducted by a certified laboratory.—
(1) A person or entity seeking to be a certified marijuana
testing laboratory must:
(a) Not be owned or controlled by a medical marijuana
treatment center.
(b) Submit a completed application accompanied by an
application fee, as established by department rule.
(c) Submit proof of an accreditation or a certification
approved by the department issued by an accreditation or a
certification organization approved by the department. The
department shall adopt by rule a list of approved laboratory
accreditations or certifications and accreditation or
certification organizations.
(d) Require all owners and managers to submit to and pass a
level 2 background screening pursuant to s. 435.04 and shall
deny certification if the person or entity has been found guilty
of, or has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to,
regardless of adjudication, any offense listed in chapter 837,
chapter 895, or chapter 896 or similar law of another
jurisdiction.
1. Such owners and managers must submit a full set of
fingerprints to the department or to a vendor, entity, or agency
authorized by s. 943.053(13). The department, vendor, entity, or
agency shall forward the fingerprints to the Department of Law
Enforcement for state processing, and the Department of Law
Enforcement shall forward the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau
of Investigation for national processing.
2. Fees for state and federal fingerprint processing and
retention shall be borne by such owners or managers. The state
cost for fingerprint processing shall be as provided in s.
943.053(3)(e) for records provided to persons or entities other
than those specified as exceptions therein.
3. Fingerprints submitted to the Department of Law
Enforcement pursuant to this paragraph shall be retained by the
Department of Law Enforcement as provided in s. 943.05(2)(g) and
(h) and, when the Department of Law Enforcement begins
participation in the program, enrolled in the Federal Bureau of
Investigation’s national retained print arrest notification
program. Any arrest record identified shall be reported to the
department.
(e) Demonstrate to the department the capability of meeting
the standards for certification required by this subsection, and
the testing requirements of s. 381.986 and this section and
rules adopted thereunder.
(2) The department shall adopt rules pursuant to ss.
120.536(1) and 120.54 establishing a procedure for initial
certification and biennial renewal, including initial
application and biennial renewal fees sufficient to cover the
costs of administering this certification program. The
department shall renew the certification biennially if the
laboratory meets the requirements of this section and pays the
biennial renewal fee.
(3) The department shall adopt rules pursuant to ss.
120.536(1) and 120.54 establishing the standards for
certification of marijuana testing laboratories under this
section. The Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services and
the Department of Environmental Protection shall assist the
department in developing the rule, which must include, but is
not limited to:
(a) Security standards.
(b) Minimum standards for personnel.
(c) Sample collection method and process standards.
(d) Proficiency testing for tetrahydrocannabinol potency,
concentration of cannabidiol, and contaminants unsafe for human
consumption, as determined by department rule.
(e) Reporting content, format, and frequency.
(f) Audits and onsite inspections.
(g) Quality assurance.
(h) Equipment and methodology.
(i) Chain of custody.
(j) Any other standard the department deems necessary to
ensure the health and safety of the public.
(4) A marijuana testing laboratory may acquire marijuana
only from a medical marijuana treatment center. A marijuana
testing laboratory is prohibited from selling, distributing, or
transferring marijuana received from a marijuana treatment
center, except that a marijuana testing laboratory may transfer
a sample to another marijuana testing laboratory in this state.
(5) A marijuana testing laboratory must properly dispose of
all samples it receives, unless transferred to another marijuana
testing laboratory, after all necessary tests have been
conducted and any required period of storage has elapsed, as
established by department rule.
(6) A marijuana testing laboratory shall use the computer
software tracking system selected by the department under s.
381.986.
(7) The following acts constitute grounds for which
disciplinary action specified in subsection (8) may be taken
against a certified marijuana testing laboratory:
(a) Permitting unauthorized persons to perform technical
procedures or issue reports.
(b) Demonstrating incompetence or making consistent errors
in the performance of testing or erroneous reporting.
(c) Performing a test and rendering a report thereon to a
person or entity not authorized by law to receive such services.
(d) Failing to file any report required under this section
or s. 381.986 or the rules adopted thereunder.
(e) Reporting a test result if the test was not performed.
(f) Failing to correct deficiencies within the time
required by the department.
(g) Violating or aiding and abetting in the violation of
any provision of s. 381.986 or this section or any rules adopted
thereunder.
(8) The department may refuse to issue or renew, or may
suspend or revoke, the certification of a marijuana testing
laboratory that is found to be in violation of this section or
any rules adopted hereunder. The department may impose fines for
violations of this section or rules adopted thereunder, based on
a schedule adopted in rule. In determining the administrative
action to be imposed for a violation, the department must
consider the following factors:
(a) The severity of the violation, including the
probability of death or serious harm to the health or safety of
any person that may result or has resulted; the severity or
potential harm; and the extent to which s. 381.986 or this
section were violated.
(b) The actions taken by the marijuana testing laboratory
to correct the violation or to remedy the complaint.
(c) Any previous violation by the marijuana testing
laboratory.
(d) The financial benefit to the marijuana testing
laboratory of committing or continuing the violation.
(9) The department may adopt rules pursuant to ss.
120.536(1) and 120.54 to implement this section.
(10) Fees collected by the department under this section
shall be deposited in the Grants and Donations Trust Fund within
the Department of Health.
Section 7. Section 381.989, Florida Statutes, is created to
read:
381.989 Public education campaigns.—
(1) DEFINITIONS.—As used in this section, the term:
(a) “Cannabis” has the same meaning as in s. 893.02.
(b) “Department” means the Department of Health.
(c) “Marijuana” has the same meaning as in s. 381.986.
(2) STATEWIDE CANNABIS AND MARIJUANA EDUCATION AND ILLICIT
USE PREVENTION CAMPAIGN.—
(a) The department shall implement a statewide cannabis and
marijuana education and illicit use prevention campaign to
publicize accurate information regarding:
1. The legal requirements for licit use and possession of
marijuana in this state.
2. Safe use of marijuana, including preventing access by
persons other than qualified patients as defined in s. 381.986,
particularly children.
3. The short-term and long-term health effects of cannabis
and marijuana use, particularly on minors and young adults.
4. Other cannabis-related and marijuana-related education
determined by the department to be necessary to the public
health and safety.
(b) The department shall provide educational materials
regarding the eligibility for medical use of marijuana by
individuals diagnosed with a terminal condition to individuals
that provide palliative care or hospice services.
(c) The department may use television messaging, radio
broadcasts, print media, digital strategies, social media, and
any other form of messaging deemed necessary and appropriate by
the department to implement the campaign. The department may
work with school districts, community organizations, and
businesses and business organizations and other entities to
provide training and programming.
(d) The department may contract with one or more vendors to
implement the campaign.
(e) The department shall contract with an independent
entity to conduct annual evaluations of the campaign. The
evaluations shall assess the reach and impact of the campaign,
success in educating the citizens of the state regarding the
legal parameters for marijuana use, success in preventing
illicit access by adults and youth, and success in preventing
negative health impacts from the legalization of marijuana. The
first year of the program, the evaluator shall conduct surveys
to establish baseline data on youth and adult cannabis use, the
attitudes of youth and the general public toward cannabis and
marijuana, and any other data deemed necessary for long-term
analysis. By January 31 of each year, the department shall
submit to the Governor, the President of the Senate, and the
Speaker of the House of Representatives the annual evaluation of
the campaign.
(3) STATEWIDE IMPAIRED DRIVING EDUCATION CAMPAIGN.—
(a) The Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles
shall implement a statewide impaired driving education campaign
to raise awareness and prevent marijuana-related and cannabis
related impaired driving and may contract with one or more
vendors to implement the campaign. The Department of Highway
Safety and Motor Vehicles may use television messaging, radio
broadcasts, print media, digital strategies, social media, and
any other form of messaging deemed necessary and appropriate by
the department to implement the campaign.
(b) At a minimum, the Department of Highway Safety and
Motor Vehicles or a contracted vendor shall establish baseline
data on the number of marijuana-related citations for driving
under the influence, marijuana-related traffic arrests,
marijuana-related traffic accidents, and marijuana-related
traffic fatalities, and shall track these measures annually
thereafter. The Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles
or a contracted vendor shall annually evaluate and compile a
report on the efficacy of the campaign based on those measures
and other measures established by the Department of Highway
Safety and Motor Vehicles. By January 31 of each year, the
Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles shall submit the
report on the evaluation of the campaign to the Governor, the
President of the Senate, and the Speaker of the House of
Representatives.
Section 8. Subsection (1) of section 385.211, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
385.211 Refractory and intractable epilepsy treatment and
research at recognized medical centers.—
(1) As used in this section, the term “low-THC cannabis”
means “low-THC cannabis” as defined in s. 381.986 that is
dispensed only from a dispensing organization as defined in
former s. 381.986, Florida Statutes 2016, or a medical marijuana
treatment center as defined in s. 381.986.
Section 9. Paragraphs (b) through (e) of subsection (2) of
section 499.0295, Florida Statutes, are redesignated as
paragraphs (a) through (d), respectively, and present paragraphs
(a) and (c) of that subsection, and subsection (3) of that
section are amended, to read:
499.0295 Experimental treatments for terminal conditions.—
(2) As used in this section, the term:
(a) “Dispensing organization” means an organization
approved by the Department of Health under s. 381.986(5) to
cultivate, process, transport, and dispense low-THC cannabis,
medical cannabis, and cannabis delivery devices.
(b)(c) “Investigational drug, biological product, or
device” means:
1. a drug, biological product, or device that has
successfully completed phase 1 of a clinical trial but has not
been approved for general use by the United States Food and Drug
Administration and remains under investigation in a clinical
trial approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration; or
2. Medical cannabis that is manufactured and sold by a
dispensing organization.
(3) Upon the request of an eligible patient, a manufacturer
may, or upon a physician’s order pursuant to s. 381.986, a
dispensing organization may:
(a) Make its investigational drug, biological product, or
device available under this section.
(b) Provide an investigational drug, biological product, or
device, or cannabis delivery device as defined in s. 381.986 to
an eligible patient without receiving compensation.
(c) Require an eligible patient to pay the costs of, or the
costs associated with, the manufacture of the investigational
drug, biological product, or device, or cannabis delivery device
as defined in s. 381.986.
Section 10. Subsection (3) of section 893.02, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
893.02 Definitions.—The following words and phrases as used
in this chapter shall have the following meanings, unless the
context otherwise requires:
(3) “Cannabis” means all parts of any plant of the genus
Cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin
extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the
plant or its seeds or resin. The term does not include
“marijuana,” “low-THC cannabis,” as defined in s. 381.986, if
manufactured, possessed, sold, purchased, delivered,
distributed, or dispensed, in conformance with s. 381.986.
Section 11. Section 1004.4351, Florida Statutes, is created
to read:
1004.4351 Medical marijuana research and education.—
(1) SHORT TITLE.—This section shall be known and may be
cited as the “Medical Marijuana Research and Education Act.”
(2) LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.—The Legislature finds that:
(a) The present state of knowledge concerning the use of
marijuana to alleviate pain and treat illnesses is limited
because permission to perform clinical studies on marijuana is
difficult to obtain, with access to research-grade marijuana so
restricted that little or no unbiased studies have been
performed.
(b) Under the State Constitution, marijuana is available
for the treatment of certain debilitating medical conditions.
(c) Additional clinical studies are needed to ensure that
the residents of this state obtain the correct dosing,
formulation, route, modality, frequency, quantity, and quality
of marijuana for specific illnesses.
(d) An effective medical marijuana research and education
program would mobilize the scientific, educational, and medical
resources that presently exist in this state to determine the
appropriate and best use of marijuana to treat illness.
(3) DEFINITIONS.—As used in this section, the term:
(a) “Board” means the Medical Marijuana Research and
Education Board.
(b) “Coalition” means the Coalition for Medical Marijuana
Research and Education.
(c) “Marijuana” has the same meaning as provided in s. 29,
Art. X of the State Constitution.
(4) COALITION FOR MEDICAL MARIJUANA RESEARCH AND
EDUCATION.—
(a) There is established within the H. Lee Moffitt Cancer
Center and Research Institute, Inc., the Coalition for Medical
Marijuana Research and Education. The purpose of the coalition
is to conduct rigorous scientific research, provide education,
disseminate research, and guide policy for the adoption of a
statewide policy on ordering and dosing practices for the
medical use of marijuana. The coalition shall be physically
located at the H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Inc.
(b) The Medical Marijuana Research and Education Board is
established to direct the operations of the coalition. The board
shall be composed of seven members appointed by the chief
executive officer of the H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and
Research Institute, Inc. Board members must have experience in a
variety of scientific and medical fields, including, but not
limited to, oncology, neurology, psychology, pediatrics,
nutrition, and addiction. Members shall be appointed to 4-year
terms and may be reappointed to serve additional terms. The
chair shall be elected by the board from among its members to
serve a 2-year term. The board shall meet at least semiannually
at the call of the chair or, in his or her absence or
incapacity, the vice chair. Four members constitute a quorum. A
majority vote of the members present is required for all actions
of the board. The board may prescribe, amend, and repeal a
charter governing the manner in which it conducts its business.
A board member shall serve without compensation but is entitled
to be reimbursed for travel expenses by the coalition or the
organization he or she represents in accordance with s. 112.061.
(c) The coalition shall be administered by a coalition
director, who shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of
the board. The coalition director shall, subject to the approval
of the board:
1. Propose a budget for the coalition.
2. Foster the collaboration of scientists, researchers, and
other appropriate personnel in accordance with the coalition’s
charter.
3. Identify and prioritize the research to be conducted by
the coalition.
4. Prepare the Medical Marijuana Research and Education
Plan for submission to the board.
5. Apply for grants to obtain funding for research
conducted by the coalition.
6. Perform other duties as determined by the board.
(d) The board shall advise the Board of Governors, the
State Surgeon General, the Governor, and the Legislature with
respect to medical marijuana research and education in this
state. The board shall explore methods of implementing and
enforcing medical marijuana laws in relation to cancer control,
research, treatment, and education.
(e) The board shall annually adopt a plan for medical
marijuana research, known as the “Medical Marijuana Research and
Education Plan,” which must be in accordance with state law and
coordinate with existing programs in this state. The plan must
include recommendations for the coordination and integration of
medical, pharmacological, nursing, paramedical, community, and
other resources connected with the treatment of debilitating
medical conditions; research related to the treatment of such
medical conditions; and education.
(f) By February 15 of each year, the board shall issue a
report to the Governor, the President of the Senate, and the
Speaker of the House of Representatives on research projects,
community outreach initiatives, and future plans for the
coalition.
(g) Beginning January 15, 2018, and quarterly thereafter,
the Department of Health shall submit to the board a data set
that includes, for each patient registered in the medical
marijuana use registry, the patient’s qualifying medical
condition and the daily dose amount and forms of marijuana
certified for the patient.
(5) RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE H. LEE MOFFITT CANCER CENTER
AND RESEARCH INSTITUTE, INC.—The H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center
and Research Institute, Inc., shall allocate staff and provide
information and assistance, as the coalition’s budget permits,
to assist the board in fulfilling its responsibilities.
Section 12. Subsection (1) of section 1004.441, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
1004.441 Refractory and intractable epilepsy treatment and
research.—
(1) As used in this section, the term “low-THC cannabis”
means “low-THC cannabis” as defined in s. 381.986 that is
dispensed only from a dispensing organization as defined in
former s. 381.986, Florida Statutes 2016, or a medical marijuana
treatment center as defined in s. 381.986.
Section 13. Subsection (8) is added to section 1006.062,
Florida Statutes, to read:
1006.062 Administration of medication and provision of
medical services by district school board personnel.—
(8) Each district school board shall adopt a policy and a
procedure for allowing a student who is a qualified patient, as
defined in s. 381.986, to use marijuana obtained pursuant to
that section. Such policy and procedure shall ensure access by
the qualified patient; identify how the marijuana will be
received, accounted for, and stored; and establish processes to
prevent access by other students and school personnel whose
access would be unnecessary for the implementation of the
policy.
Section 14. Department of Health; authority to adopt rules;
cause of action.—
(1) EMERGENCY RULEMAKING.—
(a) The Department of Health and the applicable boards
shall adopt emergency rules pursuant to s. 120.54(4), Florida
Statutes, and this section necessary to implement ss. 381.986
and 381.988, Florida Statutes. If an emergency rule adopted
under this section is held to be unconstitutional or an invalid
exercise of delegated legislative authority, and becomes void,
the department or the applicable boards may adopt an emergency
rule pursuant to this section to replace the rule that has
become void. If the emergency rule adopted to replace the void
emergency rule is also held to be unconstitutional or an invalid
exercise of delegated legislative authority and becomes void,
the department and the applicable boards must follow the
nonemergency rulemaking procedures of the Administrative
Procedures Act to replace the rule that has become void.
(b) For emergency rules adopted under this section, the
department and the applicable boards need not make the findings
required by s. 120.54(4)(a), Florida Statutes. Emergency rules
adopted under this section are exempt from ss. 120.54(3)(b) and
120.541, Florida Statutes. The department and the applicable
boards shall meet the procedural requirements in s. 120.54(a),
Florida Statutes, if the department or the applicable boards
have, before the effective date of this act, held any public
workshops or hearings on the subject matter of the emergency
rules adopted under this subsection. Challenges to emergency
rules adopted under this subsection are subject to the time
schedules provided in s. 120.56(5), Florida Statutes.
(c) Emergency rules adopted under this section are exempt
from s. 120.54(4)(c), Florida Statutes, and shall remain in
effect until replaced by rules adopted under the nonemergency
rulemaking procedures of the Administrative Procedures Act. By
January 1, 2018, the department and the applicable boards shall
initiate nonemergency rulemaking pursuant to the Administrative
Procedures Act to replace all emergency rules adopted under this
section by publishing a notice of rule development in the
Florida Administrative Register. Except as provided in paragraph
(a), after January 1, 2018, the department and applicable boards
may not adopt rules pursuant to the emergency rulemaking
procedures provided in this section.
(2) CAUSE OF ACTION.—
(a) As used in s. 29(d)(3), Article X of the State
Constitution, the term:
1. “Issue regulations” means the filing by the department
of a rule or emergency rule for adoption with the Department of
State.
2. “Judicial relief” means an action for declaratory
judgment pursuant to chapter 86, Florida Statutes.
(b) The venue for actions brought against the department
pursuant to s. 29(d)(3), Article X of the State Constitution
shall be in the circuit court in and for Leon County.
(c) If the department is not issuing patient and caregiver
identification cards or licensing medical marijuana treatment
centers by October 3, 2017, the following shall be a defense to
a cause of action brought under s. 29(d)(3), Article X of the
State Constitution:
1. The department is unable to issue patient and caregiver
identification cards or license medical marijuana treatment
centers due to litigation challenging a rule as an invalid
exercise of delegated legislative authority or unconstitutional.
2. The department is unable to issue patient or caregiver
identification cards or license medical marijuana treatment
centers due to a rule being held as an invalid exercise of
delegated legislative authority or unconstitutional.
Section 15. Department of Law Enforcement; training related
to medical use of marijuana.-The Department of Law Enforcement
shall develop a 4-hour online initial training course, and a 2
hour online continuing education course, which shall be made
available for use by all law enforcement agencies in this state.
Such training shall cover the legal parameters of marijuana
related activities governed by ss. 381.986 and 381.988, Florida
Statutes, relating to criminal laws governing marijuana.
Section 16. Section 385.212, Florida Statutes, is amended
to read:
385.212 Powers and duties of the Department of Health;
Office of Medical Marijuana Compassionate Use.—
(1) The Department of Health shall establish an Office of
Medical Marijuana Compassionate Use under the direction of the
Deputy State Health Officer.
(2) The Office of Medical Marijuana Compassionate Use may
enhance access to investigational new drugs for Florida patients
through approved clinical treatment plans or studies. The Office
of Medical Marijuana Compassionate Use may:
(a) Create a network of state universities and medical
centers recognized pursuant to s. 381.925.
(b) Make any necessary application to the United States
Food and Drug Administration or a pharmaceutical manufacturer to
facilitate enhanced access to medical compassionate use of
marijuana for Florida patients.
(c) Enter into any agreements necessary to facilitate
enhanced access to medical compassionate use of marijuana for
Florida patients.
(3) The department may adopt rules necessary to implement
this section.
(4)  The Office of Medical Marijuana Use shall administer
and enforce s. 381.986.
Section 17. If any provision of this act or its application
to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions or applications of this act
which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions of this act are
severable.
Section 18. The Division of Law Revision and Information is
directed to replace the phrase “the effective date of this act”
wherever it occurs in this act with the date the act becomes a
law.
Section 19. (1) For the 2017-2018 fiscal year, 55 full-time
equivalent positions, with associated salary rate of 2,198,860,
are authorized and the sums of $3.5 million in nonrecurring
funds from the General Revenue Fund and $4,055,292 in recurring
funds and $1,238,148 in nonrecurring funds from the Grants and
Donations Trust Fund are appropriated to the Department of
Health for the purpose of implementing the requirements of this
act. Of the funds appropriated, $3,158,572 in recurring funds
and $1,238,148 in nonrecurring funds from the Grants and
Donations Trust Fund and 27 full-time equivalent positions shall
be placed in reserve. The Department of Health is authorized to
submit budget amendments requesting the release of funds being
held in reserve pursuant to chapter 216, Florida Statutes
contingent upon need and demonstration of fee collections to
support the budget authority.
(2) For the 2017-2018 fiscal year, the sum of $500,000 in
nonrecurring funds from the General Revenue Fund is appropriated
to the Department of Health to implement the statewide cannabis
and marijuana education and illicit use prevention campaign
established under s. 381.989, Florida Statutes.
(3) For the 2017-2018 fiscal year, the sum of $5 million in
nonrecurring funds from the Highway Safety Operating Trust Fund
are appropriated to the Department of Highway Safety and Motor
Vehicles to implement the statewide impaired driving education
campaign established under s. 381.989, Florida Statutes.
(4) For the 2017-2018 fiscal year, the sum of $100,000 in
recurring funds from the Highway Safety Operating Trust Fund is
appropriated to the Department of Highway Safety and Motor
Vehicles for the purpose of training additional law enforcement
officers as drug recognition experts.
(5) For the 2017-2018 fiscal year, the sum of $750,000 in
nonrecurring funds from the General Revenue Fund is provided for
the Coalition for Medicinal Cannabis Research and Education at
the H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Inc.,
to conduct medical cannabis research.
Section 20. This act shall take effect upon becoming a law.