A bill to be entitled                      
An act relating to the sale and delivery of firearms;
amending s. 790.065, F.S.; requiring the parties, if
neither party to a sale, lease, or transfer of a
firearm is a licensed dealer, to complete the sale,
lease, or transfer through a licensed dealer;
specifying procedures and requirements for a licensed
dealer, a seller, lessor, or transferor, and a buyer,
lessee, or transferee; authorizing a licensed dealer
to charge a buyer or transferee specified fees;
providing applicability; deleting provisions
authorizing a licensee to complete the sale or
transfer of a firearm to a person without receiving
certain notification from the Department of Law
Enforcement informing the licensee that such person is
prohibited from receipt or possession of a firearm or
providing a unique approval number under certain
circumstances; deleting provisions exempting a
licensed importer, licensed manufacturer, or licensed
dealer from the sale and delivery requirements, under
certain circumstances; amending s. 790.0655, F.S.;
applying the mandatory 3-day waiting period to private
sales of handguns facilitated through a licensed
dealer; amending s. 790.335, F.S.; conforming a cross
reference; providing an effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:

Section 1. Subsections (1), (3), and (10) of section
790.065, Florida Statutes, are amended to read:
790.065 Sale and delivery of firearms.—
(1)(a) A licensed importer, licensed manufacturer, or
licensed dealer may not sell or deliver from her or his
inventory at her or his licensed premises any firearm to another
person, other than a licensed importer, licensed manufacturer,
licensed dealer, or licensed collector, until she or he has:
1. Obtained a completed form from the potential buyer or
transferee, which form shall have been promulgated by the
Department of Law Enforcement and provided by the licensed
importer, licensed manufacturer, or licensed dealer, which shall
include the name, date of birth, gender, race, and social
security number or other identification number of such potential
buyer or transferee and has inspected proper identification
including an identification containing a photograph of the
potential buyer or transferee.
2. Collected a fee from the potential buyer for processing
the criminal history check of the potential buyer. The fee shall
be established by the Department of Law Enforcement and may not
exceed $8 per transaction. The Department of Law Enforcement may
reduce, or suspend collection of, the fee to reflect payment
received from the Federal Government applied to the cost of
maintaining the criminal history check system established by
this section as a means of facilitating or supplementing the
National Instant Criminal Background Check System. The
Department of Law Enforcement shall, by rule, establish
procedures for the fees to be transmitted by the licensee to the
Department of Law Enforcement. All such fees shall be deposited
into the Department of Law Enforcement Operating Trust Fund, but
shall be segregated from all other funds deposited into such
trust fund and must be accounted for separately. Such segregated
funds must not be used for any purpose other than the operation
of the criminal history checks required by this section. The
Department of Law Enforcement, each year before prior to
February 1, shall make a full accounting of all receipts and
expenditures of such funds to the President of the Senate, the
Speaker of the House of Representatives, the majority and
minority leaders of each house of the Legislature, and the
chairs of the appropriations committees of each house of the
Legislature. In the event that the cumulative amount of funds
collected exceeds the cumulative amount of expenditures by more
than $2.5 million, excess funds may be used for the purpose of
purchasing soft body armor for law enforcement officers.
3. Requested, by means of a toll-free telephone call, the
Department of Law Enforcement to conduct a check of the
information as reported and reflected in the Florida Crime
Information Center and National Crime Information Center systems
as of the date of the request.
4. Received a unique approval number for that inquiry from
the Department of Law Enforcement, and recorded the date and
such number on the consent form.
(b) However, if the person purchasing, or receiving
delivery of, the firearm is a holder of a valid concealed
weapons or firearms license pursuant to the provisions of s.
790.06 or holds an active certification from the Criminal
Justice Standards and Training Commission as a “law enforcement
officer,” a “correctional officer,” or a “correctional probation
officer” as defined in s. 943.10(1), (2), (3), (6), (7), (8), or
(9), this subsection does not apply.
(c) This subsection does not apply to the purchase, trade,
or transfer of a rifle or shotgun by a resident of this state
when the resident makes such purchase, trade, or transfer from a
licensed importer, licensed manufacturer, or licensed dealer in
another state.
(d)1. If neither party to a prospective firearms sale,
lease, or transfer is a licensed dealer, the parties to the
transaction must complete the sale, lease, or other transfer
through a licensed dealer as follows:
a. The seller, lessor, or transferor must deliver the
firearm to a licensed dealer who shall process the sale, lease,
or transfer as if he or she were the seller, lessor, or
transferor, except that the seller, lessor, or transferor who is
not a licensed dealer may remove the firearm from the business
premises of the licensed dealer while the background check is
being conducted, and while the waiting period requirement set
forth in s. 790.0655 is being met. Other than allowing the
unlicensed seller or transferor to remove the firearm from the
licensed dealer’s business premises, the licensed dealer shall
comply with all requirements of federal and state law which
would apply if he or she were the seller, lessor, or transferor
of the firearm;
b. The licensed dealer shall conduct a background check on
the buyer or other transferee in accordance with this section
and, unless the transaction is prohibited, and after all other
legal requirements are met, including those set forth in s.
790.0655, the dealer shall either:
(I) Deliver the firearm to the seller, lessor, or
transferor, who shall complete the transaction and deliver the
firearm to the buyer; or
(II) If the seller, lessor, or transferor has removed the
firearm from the licensed dealer’s business premises, contact
the seller, lessor, or transferor to let him or her know that he
or she may complete the transaction and deliver the firearm to
the buyer;
c. If the licensed dealer cannot legally complete the
transaction, the dealer must:
(I) Return the firearm to the seller, lessor, or
transferor; or
(II) If the seller, lessor, or transferor has removed the
firearm from the licensed dealer’s business premises, contact
the seller, lessor, or transferor to let him or her know that
the transaction is prohibited, and the seller, lessor, or
transferor may not deliver the firearm to the buyer; and
d. The licensed dealer may require the buyer or other
transferee to pay a fee covering the administrative costs
incurred by the licensed dealer for facilitating the transfer of
the firearm, plus applicable fees pursuant to federal and state
law.
2. This paragraph does not apply to:
a. The activities of the United States Marshals Service,
members of the United States Armed Forces or the National Guard,
or federal officials required to carry firearms while engaged in
performing their official duties; and
b. The following activities, unless the lawful owner knows
or has reasonable cause to believe that federal, state, or local
law prohibits the transferee from purchasing or possessing
firearms, or that the transferee is likely to use the firearm
for unlawful purposes:
(I) The delivery of a firearm to a gunsmith for service or
repair, or the return of the firearm to its owner by the
gunsmith;
(II) The transfer of a firearm to a carrier, warehouseman,
or other person engaged in the business of transportation or
storage, to the extent that the receipt, possession, or having
on or about the person of any firearm is in the ordinary course
of business and in conformity with federal, state, and local
laws, and not for the personal use of any such person;
(III) The loan of a firearm solely for the purpose of
shooting at targets, if the loan occurs on the premises of a
properly licensed target facility and if the firearm is at all
times kept within the premises of the target facility;
(IV) The loan of a firearm to a person who is under 18
years of age for lawful hunting, sporting, or educational
purposes while under the direct supervision and control of a
responsible adult;
(V) The loan of a firearm to a person who is 18 years of
age or older if the firearm remains in the person’s possession
only while the person is accompanying the lawful owner and using
the firearm for lawful hunting, sporting, or recreational
purposes; or
(VI) The loan of a firearm to an adult family member of the
lawful owner of the firearm if the lawful owner resides with the
family member but is not present in the residence, provided that
the family member does not maintain control over the firearm for
more than 10 consecutive days.
(3) In the event of scheduled computer downtime, electronic
failure, or similar emergency beyond the control of the
Department of Law Enforcement, the department shall immediately
notify the licensee of the reason for, and estimated length of,
such delay. After such notification, the department shall
forthwith, and in no event later than the end of the next
business day of the licensee, either inform the requesting
licensee if its records demonstrate that the buyer or transferee
is prohibited from receipt or possession of a firearm pursuant
to Florida and Federal law or provide the licensee with a unique
approval number. Unless notified by the end of said next
business day that the buyer or transferee is so prohibited, and
without regard to whether she or he has received a unique
approval number, the licensee may complete the sale or transfer
and shall not be deemed in violation of this section with
respect to such sale or transfer.
(10) A licensed importer, licensed manufacturer, or
licensed dealer is not required to comply with the requirements
of this section in the event of:
(a) Unavailability of telephone service at the licensed
premises due to the failure of the entity which provides
telephone service in the state, region, or other geographical
area in which the licensee is located to provide telephone
service to the premises of the licensee due to the location of
said premises; or the interruption of telephone service by
reason of hurricane, tornado, flood, natural disaster, or other
act of God, war, invasion, insurrection, riot, or other bona
fide emergency, or other reason beyond the control of the
licensee; or
(b) Failure of the Department of Law Enforcement to comply
with the requirements of subsections (2) and (3).
Section 2. Paragraph (a) of subsection (1) of section
790.0655, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
790.0655 Purchase and delivery of handguns; mandatory
waiting period; exceptions; penalties.—
(1)(a) There shall be a mandatory 3-day waiting period,
which shall be 3 days, excluding weekends and legal holidays,
between the purchase and the delivery at retail, or the delivery
through a private sale facilitated through a licensed dealer
under s. 790.065(1)(d), of any handgun. “Purchase” means the
transfer of money or other valuable consideration to the
retailer. “Handgun” means a firearm capable of being carried and
used by one hand, such as a pistol or revolver. “Retailer” means
and includes every person engaged in the business of making
sales at retail or for distribution, or use, or consumption, or
storage to be used or consumed in this state, as defined in s.
212.02(13).
Section 3. Paragraph (e) of subsection (3) of section
790.335, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
790.335 Prohibition of registration of firearms; electronic
records.—
(3) EXCEPTIONS.—The provisions of this section shall not
apply to:
(e)1. Records kept pursuant to the recordkeeping provisions
of s. 790.065; however, nothing in this section shall be
construed to authorize the public release or inspection of
records that are made confidential and exempt from the
provisions of s. 119.07(1) by s. 790.065(3)(a) s. 790.065(4)(a).
2. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to allow
the maintaining of records containing the names of purchasers or
transferees who receive unique approval numbers or the
maintaining of records of firearm transactions.
Section 4. This act shall take effect July 1, 2017, or upon
becoming a law, whichever occurs later.