A bill to be entitled
An act relating to economic programs; terminating the
Displaced Homemaker Trust Fund within the Department
of Economic Opportunity; providing for the disposition
of balances in and revenues of such trust fund;
providing procedures for the termination of the trust
fund; repealing ss. 446.50, 446.51, 446.52, and
1010.84, F.S., relating to displaced homemaker
programs, prohibited discrimination and
confidentiality of information related to such
programs, and the Displaced Homemaker Trust Fund,
respectively; amending ss. 20.60, 28.101, 187.201,
445.003, 445.004, 741.01, and 741.011, F.S.;
conforming provisions to changes made by the act;
amending s. 11.45, F.S.; authorizing the Auditor
General to audit the Florida Tourism Industry
Marketing Corporation; amending s. 201.15, F.S.;
transferring certain funds to the General Revenue
Fund; creating s. 288.101, F.S.; creating the Florida
Job Growth Grant Fund within the Department of
Economic Opportunity; authorizing the department and
Enterprise Florida, Inc., to identify projects,
solicit proposals, and make certain recommendations;
authorizing the Governor to approve certain public
infrastructure projects and workforce training grants;
providing definitions; requiring the department to
administer certain contracts; amending s. 288.1168,
F.S.; requiring the Department of Revenue to conduct
an audit; requiring the department to provide a copy
of such audit to the Governor and the Legislature by a
specified date; requiring a professional golf hall of
fame facility applicant to provide a certified
financial report to the Governor and the Legislature;
requiring payments to cease under certain conditions;
providing a repeal date; amending s. 288.1226, F.S.;
requiring the Florida Tourism Industry Marketing
Corporation to comply with certain per diem and travel
expense provisions; providing corporation board
members and officers with certain voting authority;
requiring such officers and members to file a certain
annual disclosure; requiring that such disclosure be
placed on the corporation's website; authorizing
reimbursement for per diem and travel expenses for
corporation board members; requiring such expenses to
be paid out of corporation funds; subjecting certain
contracts to specified notice and review procedures;
prohibiting the execution of certain contracts;
limiting the amount of compensation paid to
corporation officers, agents, and employees;
prohibiting certain performance bonuses and severance
pay; removing a requirement that the corporation
provide certain support to the Division of Tourism
Promotion of Enterprise Florida, Inc.; prohibiting the
corporation from creating or establishing certain
entities and expending certain funds that benefit only
one entity; requiring a one-to-one match of private to
public contributions to the corporation; providing
private contribution categories to be used for the
calculation of such match; prohibiting certain
contributions from being considered private
contributions for purposes of such match; requiring
the reversion of unmatched public contributions to the
state treasury by a certain date annually; requiring
the corporation to provide certain data to the Office
of Economic and Demographic Research; prohibiting the
expenditure of corporation funds for certain purposes;
prohibiting the acceptance or receipt of certain items
or services from certain entities; limiting lodging
expenses of corporation employees; providing an
exception; requiring the Department of Economic
Opportunity to submit a proposed operating budget for
the corporation to the Governor and the Legislature;
requiring the inclusion of certain corporation
contracts on the corporation's website; requiring the
inclusion of specified information in certain
corporation contracts and on the corporation's
website; requiring certain entities that receive a
certain amount of specified funds to report certain
public and private financial data on their websites
and provide such report to the Governor and the
Legislature on a specified date; requiring the report
to include specified financial data; requiring
specified functionality of the corporation's website;
creating s. 288.12266, F.S.; creating the Targeted
Marketing Assistance Program to enhance the tourism
business marketing of small, minority, rural, and
agritourism businesses in the state; providing a
definition; requiring the department and the
corporation to provide an annual report to the
Governor and the Legislature; amending s. 288.124,
F.S.; authorizing the Florida Tourism Industry
Marketing Corporation, rather than Enterprise Florida,
Inc., to establish a convention grants program and
guidelines governing the award of program grants and
the administration of such program; amending s.
288.901, F.S.; authorizing reimbursement for per diem
and travel expenses for Enterprise Florida, Inc.,
board members; requiring such expenses to be paid out
of Enterprise Florida, Inc., funds; amending s.
288.903, F.S.; subjecting certain contracts to
specified notice and review procedures; prohibiting
the execution of certain contracts; prohibiting
Enterprise Florida, Inc., from creating or
establishing certain entities; requiring Enterprise
Florida, Inc., to comply with certain per diem and
travel expense provisions; amending s. 288.904, F.S.;
requiring the reversion of unmatched public
contributions to the state treasury by a certain date
annually; requiring the Department of Economic
Opportunity to submit a proposed operating budget for
Enterprise Florida, Inc., to the Governor and the
Legislature; requiring the inclusion of executed
Enterprise Florida, Inc., contracts on the Enterprise
Florida, Inc., website; requiring the inclusion of
specified information in certain Enterprise Florida,
Inc., contracts and on the Enterprise Florida, Inc.,
website; requiring certain entities that receive a
certain amount of specified funds to report certain
public and private financial data on their websites
and provide such report to the Governor and the
Legislature on a specified date; requiring the report
to include specified financial data; requiring
specified functionality of the Enterprise Florida,
Inc., website; amending s. 288.905, F.S.; limiting the
amount of public compensation paid to Enterprise
Florida, Inc., employees; prohibiting certain
performance bonuses and severance pay; limiting
lodging expenses of Enterprise Florida, Inc.,
employees; providing an exception; prohibiting certain
expenditures; prohibiting the acceptance or receipt of
certain items or services from certain entities;
amending s. 288.92, F.S.; conforming provisions to
changes made by the act; amending s. 288.923, F.S.;
conforming a cross-reference; providing
appropriations; providing an effective date.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:
Section 1.         (1)     The Displaced Homemaker Trust Fund, FLAIR
number 40-2-160, within the Department of Economic Opportunity
is terminated.
(2)     All current balances remaining in, and all revenues
of, the trust fund shall be transferred to the General Revenue
Fund.
(3)     The Department of Economic Opportunity shall pay any
outstanding debts and obligations of the terminated fund as soon
as practicable, and the Chief Financial Officer shall close out
and remove the terminated fund from various state accounting
systems using generally accepted accounting principles
concerning warrants outstanding, assets, and liabilities.
Section 2.         Section 446.50, Florida Statutes, is repealed.
Section 3.         Section 446.51, Florida Statutes, is repealed.
Section 4.         Section 446.52, Florida Statutes, is repealed.
Section 5.         Section 1010.84, Florida Statutes, is repealed.
Section 6.         Paragraph (b) of subsection (10) of section
20.60, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
20.60       Department of Economic Opportunity; creation; powers
and duties.--
(10)        The department, with assistance from Enterprise
Florida, Inc., shall, by November 1 of each year, submit an
annual report to the Governor, the President of the Senate, and
the Speaker of the House of Representatives on the condition of
the business climate and economic development in the state.
(b)      The report must incorporate annual reports of other
programs, including:
1.      The displaced homemaker program established under s.
446.50.
1.2.        Information provided by the Department of Revenue
under s. 290.014.
2.3.        Information provided by enterprise zone development
agencies under s. 290.0056 and an analysis of the activities and
accomplishments of each enterprise zone.
3.4.        The Economic Gardening Business Loan Pilot Program
established under s. 288.1081 and the Economic Gardening
Technical Assistance Pilot Program established under s.
288.1082.
4.5.        A detailed report of the performance of the Black
Business Loan Program and a cumulative summary of quarterly
report data required under s. 288.714.
5.6.        The Rural Economic Development Initiative established
under s. 288.0656.
6.7.        The Florida Unique Abilities Partner Program.
Section 7.         Subsection (1) of section 28.101, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
28.101       Petitions and records of dissolution of marriage;
additional charges.--
(1)     When a party petitions for a dissolution of marriage,
in addition to the filing charges in s. 28.241, the clerk shall
collect and receive:
(a)     A charge of $5. On a monthly basis, the clerk shall
transfer the moneys collected pursuant to this paragraph to the
Department of Revenue for deposit in the Child Welfare Training
Trust Fund created in s. 402.40.
(b)     A charge of $5. On a monthly basis, the clerk shall
transfer the moneys collected pursuant to this paragraph to the
Department of Revenue for deposit in the Displaced Homemaker
Trust Fund created in s. 446.50. If a petitioner does not have
sufficient funds with which to pay this fee and signs an
affidavit so stating, all or a portion of the fee shall be
waived subject to a subsequent order of the court relative to
the payment of the fee.
(b)(c)       A charge of $55. On a monthly basis, the clerk
shall transfer the moneys collected pursuant to this paragraph
to the Department of Revenue for deposit in the Domestic
Violence Trust Fund. Such funds which are generated shall be
directed to the Department of Children and Families for the
specific purpose of funding domestic violence centers.
(c)(d)       A charge of $37.50 32.50. On a monthly basis, the
clerk shall transfer the moneys collected pursuant to this
paragraph as follows:
1.      An amount of $7.50 to the Department of Revenue for
deposit in the Displaced Homemaker Trust Fund.
2.      An amount of $25 to the Department of Revenue for
deposit in the General Revenue Fund.
Section 8.         Paragraph (b) of subsection (2) of section
187.201, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
187.201       State Comprehensive Plan adopted.--The Legislature
hereby adopts as the State Comprehensive Plan the following
specific goals and policies:
(2)      FAMILIES.--
(b)      Policies.--
1.      Eliminate state policies which cause voluntary family
separations.
2.      Promote concepts to stabilize the family unit to
strengthen bonds between parents and children.
3.      Promote home care services for the sick and disabled.
4.      Provide financial support for alternative child care
services.
5.      Increase direct parental involvement in K-12 education
programs.
6.      Promote family dispute resolution centers.
7.      Support displaced homemaker programs.
7.8.        Provide increased assurance that child support
payments will be made.
8.9.        Actively develop job opportunities, community work
experience programs, and job training programs for persons
receiving governmental financial assistance.
9.10.        Direct local law enforcement authorities and
district mental health councils to increase efforts to prevent
family violence and to adequately punish the guilty party.
10.11.        Provide financial, mental health, and other support
for victims of family violence.
Section 9.         Paragraph (a) of subsection (3) of section
445.003, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
445.003       Implementation of the federal Workforce Innovation
and Opportunity Act.--
(3)      FUNDING.--
(a)      Title I, Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act
funds; Wagner-Peyser funds; and NAFTA/Trade Act funds will be
expended based on the 4-year plan of CareerSource Florida, Inc.
The plan must outline and direct the method used to administer
and coordinate various funds and programs that are operated by
various agencies. The following provisions apply to these funds:
1.      At least 50 percent of the Title I funds for Adults and
Dislocated Workers which are passed through to local workforce
development boards shall be allocated to and expended on
Individual Training Accounts unless a local workforce
development board obtains a waiver from CareerSource Florida,
Inc. Tuition, books, and fees of training providers and other
training services prescribed and authorized by the Workforce
Innovation and Opportunity Act qualify as Individual Training
Account expenditures.
2.      Fifteen percent of Title I funding shall be retained at
the state level and dedicated to state administration and shall
be used to design, develop, induce, and fund innovative
Individual Training Account pilots, demonstrations, and
programs. Of such funds retained at the state level, $2 million
shall be reserved for the Incumbent Worker Training Program
created under subparagraph 3. Eligible state administration
costs include the costs of funding for the board and staff of
CareerSource Florida, Inc.; operating fiscal, compliance, and
management accountability systems through CareerSource Florida,
Inc.; conducting evaluation and research on workforce
development activities; and providing technical and capacity
building assistance to local workforce development areas at the
direction of CareerSource Florida, Inc. Notwithstanding s.
445.004, such administrative costs may not exceed 25 percent of
these funds. An amount not to exceed 75 percent of these funds
shall be allocated to Individual Training Accounts and other
workforce development strategies for other training designed and
tailored by CareerSource Florida, Inc., including, but not
limited to, programs for incumbent workers, displaced
homemakers, nontraditional employment, and enterprise zones.
CareerSource Florida, Inc., shall design, adopt, and fund
Individual Training Accounts for distressed urban and rural
communities.
3.      The Incumbent Worker Training Program is created for
the purpose of providing grant funding for continuing education
and training of incumbent employees at existing Florida
businesses. The program will provide reimbursement grants to
businesses that pay for preapproved, direct, training-related
costs.
a.      The Incumbent Worker Training Program will be
administered by CareerSource Florida, Inc., which may, at its
discretion, contract with a private business organization to
serve as grant administrator.
b.      The program shall be administered pursuant to s.
134(d)(4) of the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act.
Priority for funding shall be given to businesses with 25
employees or fewer, businesses in rural areas, businesses in
distressed inner-city areas, businesses in a qualified targeted
industry, businesses whose grant proposals represent a
significant upgrade in employee skills, or businesses whose
grant proposals represent a significant layoff avoidance
strategy.
c.      All costs reimbursed by the program must be preapproved
by CareerSource Florida, Inc., or the grant administrator. The
program may not reimburse businesses for trainee wages, the
purchase of capital equipment, or the purchase of any item or
service that may possibly be used outside the training project.
A business approved for a grant may be reimbursed for
preapproved, direct, training-related costs including tuition,
fees, books and training materials, and overhead or indirect
costs not to exceed 5 percent of the grant amount.
d.      A business that is selected to receive grant funding
must provide a matching contribution to the training project,
including, but not limited to, wages paid to trainees or the
purchase of capital equipment used in the training project; must
sign an agreement with CareerSource Florida, Inc., or the grant
administrator to complete the training project as proposed in
the application; must keep accurate records of the project's
implementation process; and must submit monthly or quarterly
reimbursement requests with required documentation.
e.      All Incumbent Worker Training Program grant projects
shall be performance-based with specific measurable performance
outcomes, including completion of the training project and job
retention. CareerSource Florida, Inc., or the grant
administrator shall withhold the final payment to the grantee
until a final grant report is submitted and all performance
criteria specified in the grant contract have been achieved.
f.      CareerSource Florida, Inc., may establish guidelines
necessary to implement the Incumbent Worker Training Program.
g.      No more than 10 percent of the Incumbent Worker
Training Program's total appropriation may be used for overhead
or indirect purposes.
4.      At least 50 percent of Rapid Response funding shall be
dedicated to Intensive Services Accounts and Individual Training
Accounts for dislocated workers and incumbent workers who are at
risk of dislocation. CareerSource Florida, Inc., shall also
maintain an Emergency Preparedness Fund from Rapid Response
funds, which will immediately issue Intensive Service Accounts,
Individual Training Accounts, and other federally authorized
assistance to eligible victims of natural or other disasters. At
the direction of the Governor, these Rapid Response funds shall
be released to local workforce development boards for immediate
use after events that qualify under federal law. Funding shall
also be dedicated to maintain a unit at the state level to
respond to Rapid Response emergencies and to work with state
emergency management officials and local workforce development
boards. All Rapid Response funds must be expended based on a
plan developed by CareerSource Florida, Inc., and approved by
the Governor.
Section 10.           Paragraph (b) of subsection (5) of section
445.004, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
445.004       CareerSource Florida, Inc.; creation; purpose;
membership; duties and powers.--
(5)      CareerSource Florida, Inc., shall have all the powers
and authority not explicitly prohibited by statute which are
necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate its purposes
as determined by statute, Pub. L. No. 113-128, and the Governor,
as well as its functions, duties, and responsibilities,
including, but not limited to, the following:
(b)      Providing oversight and policy direction to ensure
that the following programs are administered by the department
in compliance with approved plans and under contract with
CareerSource Florida, Inc.:
1.      Programs authorized under Title I of the Workforce
Innovation and Opportunity Act, Pub. L. No. 113-128, with the
exception of programs funded directly by the United States
Department of Labor under Title I, s. 167.
2.      Programs authorized under the Wagner-Peyser Act of
1933, as amended, 29 U.S.C. ss. 49 et seq.
3.      Activities authorized under Title II of the Trade Act
of 2002, as amended, 19 U.S.C. ss. 2272 et seq., and the Trade
Adjustment Assistance Program.
4.      Activities authorized under 38 U.S.C. chapter 41,
including job counseling, training, and placement for veterans.
5.      Employment and training activities carried out under
funds awarded to this state by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
6.      Welfare transition services funded by the Temporary
Assistance for Needy Families Program, created under the
Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act
of 1996, as amended, Pub. L. No. 104-193, and Title IV, s. 403,
of the Social Security Act, as amended.
7.      Displaced homemaker programs, provided under s. 446.50.
7.8.        The Florida Bonding Program, provided under Pub. L.
No. 97-300, s. 164(a)(1).
8.9.        The Food Assistance Employment and Training Program,
provided under the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008, 7 U.S.C. ss.
2011-2032; the Food Security Act of 1988, Pub. L. No. 99-198;
and the Hunger Prevention Act, Pub. L. No. 100-435.
9.10.        The Quick-Response Training Program, provided under
ss. 288.046-288.047. Matching funds and in-kind contributions
that are provided by clients of the Quick-Response Training
Program shall count toward the requirements of s. 288.904,
pertaining to the return on investment from activities of
Enterprise Florida, Inc.
10.11.        The Work Opportunity Tax Credit, provided under the
Tax and Trade Relief Extension Act of 1998, Pub. L. No. 105-277,
and the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997, Pub. L. No. 105-34.
11.12.       Offender placement services, provided under ss.
944.707-944.708.
Section 11.           Subsections (3), (4), and (5) of section
741.01, Florida Statutes, are amended to read:
741.01       County court judge or clerk of the circuit court to
issue marriage license; fee.--
(3)     Further, the fee charged for each marriage license
issued in the state shall be increased by an additional sum of
$7.50 to be collected upon receipt of the application for the
issuance of a marriage license. The clerk shall transfer such
funds monthly to the Department of Revenue for deposit in the
Displaced Homemaker Trust Fund created in s. 446.50.
(3)(4)       An additional fee of $25 shall be paid to the clerk
upon receipt of the application for issuance of a marriage
license. The moneys collected shall be remitted by the clerk to
the Department of Revenue, monthly, for deposit in the General
Revenue Fund.
(4)(5)       The fee charged for each marriage license issued in
the state shall be reduced by a sum of $25 32.50 for all couples
who present valid certificates of completion of a premarital
preparation course from a qualified course provider registered
under s. 741.0305(5) for a course taken no more than 1 year
prior to the date of application for a marriage license. For
each license issued that is subject to the fee reduction of this
subsection, the clerk is not required to transfer the sum of
$7.50 to the Department of Revenue for deposit in the Displaced
Homemaker Trust Fund pursuant to subsection (3) or to transfer
the sum of $25 to the Department of Revenue for deposit in the
General Revenue Fund.
Section 12.           Section 741.011, Florida Statutes, is amended
to read:
741.011       Installment payments.--An applicant for a marriage
license who is unable to pay the fees required under s. 741.01
in a lump sum may make payment in not more than three
installments over a period of 90 days. The clerk shall accept
installment payments upon receipt of an affidavit that the
applicant is unable to pay the fees in a lump-sum payment. Upon
receipt of the third or final installment payment, the marriage
license application shall be deemed filed, and the clerk shall
issue the marriage license to the applicant and distribute the
fees as provided in s. 741.01. In the event that the marriage
license fee is paid in installments, the clerk shall retain $1
from the additional fee imposed pursuant to s. 741.01(3)
741.01(4), as a processing fee.
Section 13.           Paragraph (x) is added to subsection (3) of
section 11.45, Florida Statutes, to read:
11.45       Definitions; duties; authorities; reports; rules.--
(3)     AUTHORITY FOR AUDITS AND OTHER ENGAGEMENTS.--The
Auditor General may, pursuant to his or her own authority, or at
the direction of the Legislative Auditing Committee, conduct
audits or other engagements as determined appropriate by the
Auditor General of:
(x)     The Florida Tourism Industry Marketing Corporation.
Section 14.           Paragraph (a) of subsection (4) of section
201.15, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
201.15       Distribution of taxes collected.--All taxes
collected under this chapter are hereby pledged and shall be
first made available to make payments when due on bonds issued
pursuant to s. 215.618 or s. 215.619, or any other bonds
authorized to be issued on a parity basis with such bonds. Such
pledge and availability for the payment of these bonds shall
have priority over any requirement for the payment of service
charges or costs of collection and enforcement under this
section. All taxes collected under this chapter, except taxes
distributed to the Land Acquisition Trust Fund pursuant to
subsections (1) and (2), are subject to the service charge
imposed in s. 215.20(1). Before distribution pursuant to this
section, the Department of Revenue shall deduct amounts
necessary to pay the costs of the collection and enforcement of
the tax levied by this chapter. The costs and service charge may
not be levied against any portion of taxes pledged to debt
service on bonds to the extent that the costs and service charge
are required to pay any amounts relating to the bonds. All of
the costs of the collection and enforcement of the tax levied by
this chapter and the service charge shall be available and
transferred to the extent necessary to pay debt service and any
other amounts payable with respect to bonds authorized before
January 1, 2017, secured by revenues distributed pursuant to
this section. All taxes remaining after deduction of costs shall
be distributed as follows:
(4)      After the required distributions to the Land
Acquisition Trust Fund pursuant to subsections (1) and (2) and
deduction of the service charge imposed pursuant to s.
215.20(1), the remainder shall be distributed as follows:
(a)      The lesser of 24.18442 percent of the remainder or
$541.75 million in each fiscal year shall be paid into the State
Treasury to the credit of the State Transportation Trust Fund.
Of such funds, $75 million for each fiscal year shall be
transferred to the General Revenue Fund State Economic
Enhancement and Development Trust Fund within the Department of
Economic Opportunity. Notwithstanding any other law, the
remaining amount credited to the State Transportation Trust Fund
shall be used for:
1.      Capital funding for the New Starts Transit Program,
authorized by Title 49, U.S.C. s. 5309 and specified in s.
341.051, in the amount of 10 percent of the funds;
2.      The Small County Outreach Program specified in s.
339.2818, in the amount of 10 percent of the funds;
3.      The Strategic Intermodal System specified in ss.
339.61, 339.62, 339.63, and 339.64, in the amount of 75 percent
of the funds after deduction of the payments required pursuant
to subparagraphs 1. and 2.; and
4.      The Transportation Regional Incentive Program specified
in s. 339.2819, in the amount of 25 percent of the funds after
deduction of the payments required pursuant to subparagraphs 1.
and 2. The first $60 million of the funds allocated pursuant to
this subparagraph shall be allocated annually to the Florida
Rail Enterprise for the purposes established in s. 341.303(5).
Section 15.           Section 288.101, Florida Statutes, is created
to read:
288.101       Florida Job Growth Grant Fund.--
(1)      The Florida Job Growth Grant Fund is created within the
department to promote economic opportunity by improving public
infrastructure and enhancing workforce training. The Florida Job
Growth Grant Fund shall not be used for the exclusive benefit of
any single company, corporation, or business entity.
(2)     The department and Enterprise Florida, Inc., may
identify projects, solicit proposals, and make funding
recommendations to the Governor, who is authorized to approve:
(a)     State or local public infrastructure projects to
promote economic recovery in specific regions of the state,
economic diversification, or economic enhancement in a targeted
industry.
(b)     Workforce training grants to support programs at state
colleges and state technical centers that provide participants
with transferable, sustainable workforce skills applicable to
more than a single employer, and for equipment associated with
these programs. The department shall work with CareerSource
Florida to ensure programs are offered to the public based on
criteria established by the state college or state technical
center and do not exclude applicants who are unemployed or
underemployed.
(3)     For purposes of this section:
(a)     "Infrastructure" means any fixed capital expenditure or
fixed capital costs associated with the construction,
reconstruction, or improvement of facilities that have a life
expectancy of 5 or more years and any land acquisition, land
improvement, design, and engineering costs related thereto.
Facilities in this category include technical structures such as
roads, bridges, tunnels, water supply, sewers, electrical grids,
and telecommunications facilities.
(b)     "Public infrastructure" means infrastructure that is
owned by the public, and is for public use or predominately
benefits the public. If public infrastructure is leased or sold,
it must be leased or sold at fair market rates or value.
(c)     "Targeted industry" means any industry identified in
the most recent list provided to the Governor, the President of
the Senate, and the Speaker of the House of Representatives in
accordance with s. 288.106(q).
(4)     Contracts for projects approved by the Governor and
funded pursuant to this section shall be administered by the
department.
Section 16.            Subsection (5) of section 288.1168, Florida
Statutes, is amended, and subsections (7) and (8) are added to
that section, to read:
288.1168          Professional golf hall of fame facility.--
(5)     The Department of Revenue must may audit as provided
in s. 213.34 to verify that the distributions under this section
have been expended as required by this section on or before
October 1, 2017, and provide a copy of such audit to the
Governor, the President of the Senate, and the Speaker of the
House of Representatives on or before December 1, 2017.
(7)     On or before January 1, 2018, the applicant must
certify and provide the Governor, the President of the Senate,
and the Speaker of the House of Representatives, with a
certified financial report indicating that all payments received
from the state pursuant to s. 212.20 are being used to pay or
pledge for payment of debt service on, or to fund debt service
reserve funds, arbitrage rebate obligations, or other amounts
payable with respect to, bonds issued for the construction,
reconstruction, or renovation of the facility or for the
reimbursement of such costs or the refinancing of bonds issued
for such purpose.
(a)     Such report must identify to whom the bonds were
issued, in what amounts, the date of final maturity, the level
of funding achieved and whether bond payments are outstanding.
(b)     If the applicant fails to certify and provide proof as
required by this subsection, then all payments in accordance
with ss. 288.1168 and 212.20 shall cease on January 1, 2018.
(c)     If the applicant fails to meet the requirements of
this subsection, no new or additional applications or
certifications shall be approved, no new letters of
certification may be issued, no new contracts or agreements may
be executed, and no new awards may be made.
(8)     This section is repealed June 30, 2023.
Section 17.            Section 288.1226, Florida Statutes, is amended
to read:
288.1226          Florida Tourism Industry Marketing Corporation;
use of property; board of directors; duties; audit.--
(1)     DEFINITIONS.--For the purposes of this section, the
term "corporation" means the Florida Tourism Industry Marketing
Corporation.
(2)     ESTABLISHMENT.--The Florida Tourism Industry Marketing
Corporation is a direct-support organization of Enterprise
Florida, Inc.
(a)     The Florida Tourism Industry Marketing Corporation is
a corporation not for profit, as defined in s. 501(c)(6) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, that is incorporated
under the provisions of chapter 617 and approved by the
Department of State.
(b)     The corporation is organized and operated exclusively
to request, receive, hold, invest, and administer property and
to manage and make expenditures for the operation of the
activities, services, functions, and programs of this state
which relate to the statewide, national, and international
promotion and marketing of tourism.
(c)1.       The corporation is not an agency for the purposes of
chapters 120, 216, and 287; ss. 255.21, 255.25, and 255.254,
relating to leasing of buildings; ss. 283.33 and 283.35,
relating to bids for printing; s. 215.31; and parts I, II, and
IV-VIII of chapter 112. However, the corporation shall comply
with the per diem and travel expense provisions of s. 112.061.
2.      It is not a violation of s. 112.3143(2) or (4) for the
officers or members of the board of directors of the corporation
to:
a.      Vote on the 4-year marketing plan required under s.
288.923 or vote on any individual component of or amendment to
the plan.
b.      Participate in the establishment or calculation of
payments related to the private match requirements of subsection
(6). The officer or member must file an annual disclosure
describing the nature of his or her interests or the interests
of his or her principals, including corporate parents and
subsidiaries of his or her principal, in the private match
requirements. This annual disclosure requirement satisfies the
disclosure requirement of s. 112.3143(4). This disclosure must
be placed on the corporation's website or included in the
minutes of each meeting of the corporation's board of directors
at which the private match requirements are discussed or voted
upon.
(d)     The corporation is subject to the provisions of
chapter 119, relating to public meetings, and those provisions
of chapter 286 relating to public meetings and records.
(3)     USE OF PROPERTY.--Enterprise Florida, Inc.:
(a)     Is authorized to permit the use of property and
facilities of Enterprise Florida, Inc., by the corporation,
subject to the provisions of this section.
(b)     Shall prescribe conditions with which the corporation
must comply in order to use property and facilities of
Enterprise Florida, Inc. Such conditions shall provide for
budget and audit review and for oversight by Enterprise Florida,
Inc.
(c)     May not permit the use of property and facilities of
Enterprise Florida, Inc., if the corporation does not provide
equal employment opportunities to all persons, regardless of
race, color, national origin, sex, age, or religion.
(4)     BOARD OF DIRECTORS.--The board of directors of the
corporation shall be composed of 31 tourism-industry-related
members, appointed by Enterprise Florida, Inc., in conjunction
with the department. Board members shall serve without
compensation, but are entitled to receive reimbursement for per
diem and travel expenses pursuant to s. 112.061. Such expenses
must be paid out of funds of the corporation.
(a)      The board shall consist of 16 members, appointed in
such a manner as to equitably represent all geographic areas of
the state, with no fewer than two members from any of the
following regions:
1.      Region 1, composed of Bay, Calhoun, Escambia, Franklin,
Gadsden, Gulf, Holmes, Jackson, Jefferson, Leon, Liberty,
Okaloosa, Santa Rosa, Wakulla, Walton, and Washington Counties.
2.      Region 2, composed of Alachua, Baker, Bradford, Clay,
Columbia, Dixie, Duval, Flagler, Gilchrist, Hamilton, Lafayette,
Levy, Madison, Marion, Nassau, Putnam, St. Johns, Suwannee,
Taylor, and Union Counties.
3.      Region 3, composed of Brevard, Indian River, Lake,
Okeechobee, Orange, Osceola, St. Lucie, Seminole, Sumter, and
Volusia Counties.
4.      Region 4, composed of Citrus, Hernando, Hillsborough,
Manatee, Pasco, Pinellas, Polk, and Sarasota Counties.
5.      Region 5, composed of Charlotte, Collier, DeSoto,
Glades, Hardee, Hendry, Highlands, and Lee Counties.
6.      Region 6, composed of Broward, Martin, Miami-Dade,
Monroe, and Palm Beach Counties.
(b)      The 15 additional tourism-industry-related members
shall include 1 representative from the statewide rental car
industry; 7 representatives from tourist-related statewide
associations, including those that represent hotels,
campgrounds, county destination marketing organizations,
museums, restaurants, retail, and attractions; 3 representatives
from county destination marketing organizations; 1
representative from the cruise industry; 1 representative from
an automobile and travel services membership organization that
has at least 2.8 million members in Florida; 1 representative
from the airline industry; and 1 representative from the space
tourism industry, who will each serve for a term of 2 years.
(5)     POWERS AND DUTIES.--The corporation, in the performance
of its duties:
(a)     May make and enter into contracts and assume such
other functions as are necessary to carry out the provisions of
the 4-year marketing plan required by s. 288.923, and the
corporation's contract with Enterprise Florida, Inc., which are
not inconsistent with this or any other provision of law. A
proposed contract with a total cost of $750,000 or more is
subject to the notice and review procedures of s. 216.177. If
the chair and vice chair of the Legislative Budget Commission,
or the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of
Representatives, timely advise the corporation in writing that
such proposed contract is contrary to legislative policy and
intent, the corporation may not execute such proposed contract.
The corporation may not enter into multiple related contracts to
avoid the requirements of this paragraph.
(b)     May develop a program to provide incentives and to
attract and recognize those entities which make significant
financial and promotional contributions towards the expanded
tourism promotion activities of the corporation.
(c)     May establish a cooperative marketing program with
other public and private entities which allows the use of the
VISIT Florida logo in tourism promotion campaigns which meet the
standards of Enterprise Florida, Inc., for which the corporation
may charge a reasonable fee.
(d)     May sue and be sued and appear and defend in all
actions and proceedings in its corporate name to the same extent
as a natural person.
(e)     May adopt, use, and alter a common corporate seal.
However, such seal must always contain the words "corporation
not for profit."
(f)     Shall elect or appoint such officers and agents as its
affairs shall require and allow them reasonable compensation.
However, each officer or agent, including the president and
chief executive officer of the corporation, may not receive
public compensation for employment that exceeds the salary and
benefits authorized to be paid to the Governor. Any public
payments of performance bonuses or severance pay to an officer
or agent of the corporation are prohibited unless specifically
authorized by law.
(g)     Shall hire and establish salaries and personnel and
employee benefit programs for such permanent and temporary
employees as are necessary to carry out the provisions of the 4-
year marketing plan and the corporation's contract with
Enterprise Florida, Inc., which are not inconsistent with this
or any other provision of law. However, an employee may not
receive public compensation for employment that exceeds the
salary and benefits authorized to be paid to the Governor. Any
public payments of performance bonuses or severance pay to
employees of the corporation are prohibited unless specifically
authorized by law.
(h)     Shall provide staff support to the Division of Tourism
Promotion of Enterprise Florida, Inc. The president and chief
executive officer of the Florida Tourism Industry Marketing
Corporation shall serve without compensation as the director of
the division.
(i)     May adopt, change, amend, and repeal bylaws, not
inconsistent with law or its articles of incorporation, for the
administration of the provisions of the 4-year marketing plan
and the corporation's contract with Enterprise Florida, Inc.
(i)(j)       May conduct its affairs, carry on its operations,
and have offices and exercise the powers granted by this act in
any state, territory, district, or possession of the United
States or any foreign country. Where feasible, appropriate, and
recommended by the 4-year marketing plan developed by the
Division of Tourism Promotion of Enterprise Florida, Inc., the
corporation may collocate the programs of foreign tourism
offices in cooperation with any foreign office operated by any
agency of this state.
(j)(k)       May appear on its own behalf before boards,
commissions, departments, or other agencies of municipal,
county, state, or federal government.
(k)(l)       May request or accept any grant, payment, or gift,
of funds or property made by this state or by the United States
or any department or agency thereof or by any individual, firm,
corporation, municipality, county, or organization for any or
all of the purposes of the 4-year marketing plan and the
corporation's contract with Enterprise Florida, Inc., that are
not inconsistent with this or any other provision of law. Such
funds shall be deposited in a bank account established by the
corporation's board of directors. The corporation may expend
such funds in accordance with the terms and conditions of any
such grant, payment, or gift, in the pursuit of its
administration or in support of the programs it administers. The
corporation shall separately account for the public funds and
the private funds deposited into the corporation's bank account.
(l)(m)       Shall establish a plan for participation in the
corporation which will provide additional funding for the
administration and duties of the corporation.
(m)(n)       In the performance of its duties, may undertake, or
contract for, marketing projects and advertising research
projects.
(n)(o)       In addition to any indemnification available under
chapter 617, the corporation may indemnify, and purchase and
maintain insurance on behalf of, directors, officers, and
employees of the corporation against any personal liability or
accountability by reason of actions taken while acting within
the scope of their authority.
(o)     Shall not create or establish any other entity,
corporation, or direct-support organization.
(p)     Shall not expend funds, public or private, that
directly benefit only one company, corporation, or business
entity.
(6)     MATCHING REQUIREMENTS.--
(a)     A one-to-one match is required of private to public
contributions to the corporation. Public contributions include
all state appropriations to the corporation.
(b)     For purposes of calculating the required one-to-one
match, the corporation shall receive matching private
contributions in one of four private match categories. The
corporation shall maintain documentation of such categorized
contributions on file and make such documentation available for
inspection upon reasonable notice during its regular business
hours. Contribution details shall be included in the quarterly
reports required under subsection (8). The private match
categories are:
1.      Direct cash contributions from private sources, which
include, but are not limited to, cash derived from strategic
alliances, contributions of stocks and bonds, and partnership
contributions.
2.      Fees for services, which include, but are not limited
to, event participation, research, and brochure placement and
transparencies.
3.      Cooperative advertising, which is limited to partner
expenditures for paid media placement, partner expenditures for
collateral material distribution, and the actual market value of
contributed productions, air time, and print space.
4.      In-kind contributions, which is limited to the actual
market value of promotional contributions of partner-supplied
benefits to target audiences and the actual market value of
nonpartner-supplied air time or print space contributed for the
broadcasting or printing of such promotions, which would
otherwise require tourist promotion expenditures by the
corporation for advertising, air travel, rental car fees, hotel
rooms, RV or campsite space rental, on-site guest services, and
admission tickets. The net value of air time or print space, if
any, shall be deemed to be the actual market value of the air
time or print space, based on an average of actual unit prices
paid contemporaneously for comparable times or spaces, less the
value of increased ratings or other benefits realized by the
media outlet as a result of the promotion.
Contributions from a government entity or from an entity that
received more than 50 percent of its revenue in the previous
fiscal year from public sources, including revenue derived from
taxes, fees, or other government revenues, are not considered
private contributions for purposes of calculating the required
one-to-one match.
(c)     If the corporation fails to meet the one-to-one match
requirements of this subsection, the corporation shall revert
all unmatched public contributions to the state treasury by June
30 of each fiscal year.
(7)(6)       ANNUAL AUDIT.--The corporation shall provide for an
annual financial audit in accordance with s. 215.981. The annual
audit report shall be submitted to the Auditor General; the
Office of Program Policy Analysis and Government Accountability;
Enterprise Florida, Inc.; and the department for review. The
Office of Program Policy Analysis and Government Accountability;
Enterprise Florida, Inc.; the department; and the Auditor
General have the authority to require and receive from the
corporation or from its independent auditor any detail or
supplemental data relative to the operation of the corporation.
The department shall annually certify whether the corporation is
operating in a manner and achieving the objectives that are
consistent with the policies and goals of Enterprise Florida,
Inc., and its long-range marketing plan. The identity of a donor
or prospective donor to the corporation who desires to remain
anonymous and all information identifying such donor or
prospective donor are confidential and exempt from the
provisions of s. 119.07(1) and s. 24(a), Art. I of the State
Constitution. Such anonymity shall be maintained in the
auditor's report.
(8)(7)       REPORT.--The corporation shall provide a quarterly
report to Enterprise Florida, Inc., which shall:
(a)     Measure the current vitality of the visitor industry
of this state as compared to the vitality of such industry for
the year to date and for comparable quarters of past years.
Indicators of vitality shall be determined by Enterprise
Florida, Inc., and shall include, but not be limited to,
estimated visitor count and party size, length of stay, average
expenditure per party, and visitor origin and destination.
(b)     Provide detailed, unaudited financial statements of
sources and uses of public and private funds.
(c)     Measure progress towards annual goals and objectives
set forth in the 4-year marketing plan.
(d)     Review all pertinent research findings.
(e)     Provide other measures of accountability as requested
by Enterprise Florida, Inc.
The corporation must take all steps necessary to provide all
data that is used to develop the report, including source data,
to the Office of Economic and Demographic Research.
(9)(8)        PUBLIC RECORDS EXEMPTION.--The identity of any
person who responds to a marketing project or advertising
research project conducted by the corporation in the performance
of its duties on behalf of Enterprise Florida, Inc., or trade
secrets as defined by s. 812.081 obtained pursuant to such
activities, are exempt from s. 119.07(1) and s. 24(a), Art. I of
the State Constitution. This subsection is subject to the Open
Government Sunset Review Act in accordance with s. 119.15 and
shall stand repealed on October 2, 2021, unless reviewed and
saved from repeal through reenactment by the Legislature.
(10)        PROHIBITIONS; CORPORATE FUNDS; GIFTS.--Funds of the
corporation may not be expended for food, beverages, lodging,
entertainment, or gifts for employees of the corporation, board
members of the corporation, or employees of a tourist or
economic development entity that receives revenue from a tax
imposed pursuant to s. 125.0104, s. 125.0108, or s. 212.0305,
unless authorized pursuant to s. 112.061 or this section. An
employee or board member of the corporation may not accept or
receive food, beverages, lodging, entertainment, or gifts from a
tourist or economic development entity that receives revenue
from a tax imposed pursuant to s. 125.0104, s. 125.0108, or s.
212.0305, or from any person, vendor, or other entity, doing
business with the corporation unless such food, beverage,
lodging, entertainment, or gift is available to similarly
situated members of the general public.
(11)        LODGING EXPENSES.--Lodging expenses for an employee of
the corporation may not exceed $150 per day, excluding taxes,
unless the corporation is participating in a negotiated group
rate discount or the corporation provides documentation of at
least three comparable alternatives demonstrating that such
lodging at the required rate is not available. However, an
employee of the corporation may expend his or her own funds for
any lodging expenses in excess of $150 per day.
(12)        PROPOSED OPERATING BUDGET SUBMISSION.--By August 15 of
each fiscal year, the Department of Economic Opportunity shall
submit a proposed operating budget for the corporation including
amounts to be expended on advertising, marketing, promotions,
events, other operating capital outlay, and salaries and
benefits for each employee to the Governor, the President of the
Senate, and the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
(13)        TRANSPARENCY.--
(a)     All executed corporation contracts are to be placed
for viewing on the corporation's website. All contracts with the
corporation valued at $500,000 or more shall be placed on the
corporation's website for review 14 days prior to execution.
(b)     A contract entered into between the corporation and
any other public or private entity shall include:
1.      The purpose of the contract.
2.      Specific performance standards and responsibilities for
each entity.
3.      A detailed project or contract budget, if applicable.
4.      The value of any services provided.
5.      The projected travel and entertainment expenses for
employees and board members, if applicable.
(c)1.       Any entity that in the previous fiscal year received
more than 50 percent of its revenue from the corporation or
taxes imposed pursuant to s. 125.0104, s. 125.0108, or s.
212.0305, and that partners with the corporation or participates
in a program, cooperative advertisement, promotional
opportunity, or other activity offered by or in conjunction with
the corporation, shall annually on July 1 report all public and
private financial data to the Governor, the President of the
Senate, and the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and
include such report on its website.
2.      The financial data shall include:
a.      The total amount of revenue received from public and
private sources.
b.      The operating budget of the partner entity.
c.      Employee and board member salary and benefit details
from public and private funds.
d.      An itemized account of all expenditures by the partner
entity on the behalf of, or coordinated for the benefit of the
corporation, its board members, or employees.
e.      Itemized travel and entertainment expenditures of the
partner entity.
(d)      The following information must be posted on the
corporation's website:
1.      A plain language version of any contract that is
estimated to exceed $35,000 with a private entity, municipality,
city, town, or vendor of services, supplies, or programs,
including marketing, or for the purchase or lease or use of
lands, facilities, or properties.
2.      Any agreement entered into between the corporation and
any other entity, including a local government, private entity,
or nonprofit entity, that receives public funds or funds from a
tax imposed pursuant to s. 125.0104, s. 125.0108, or s.
212.0305.
3.      The contracts and the required information pursuant to
paragraph (b) and the financial data submitted to the
corporation pursuant to paragraph (c).
4.      Video recordings of each board meeting.
5.      A detailed report of expenditures following each
marketing event paid for with the corporation's funds. Such
report must be posted within 10 business days after the event.
6.      An annual itemized accounting of the total amount of
funds spent by any third party on behalf of the corporation or
any board member or employee of the corporation.
7.      An annual itemized accounting of the total amount of
travel and entertainment expenditures by the corporation.
(e)      The corporation's website must:
1.      Allow users to navigate to related sites to view
supporting details.
2.      Enable a taxpayer to email questions to the corporation
and make such questions and the corporation's responses publicly
viewable.
(14)(9)       REPEAL.--This section is repealed October 1, 2019,
unless reviewed and saved from repeal by the Legislature.
Section 18.           Section 288.12266, Florida Statutes, is
created to read:
288.12266         Targeted Marketing Assistance Program.--
(1)      The Targeted Marketing Assistance Program is created
to enhance the tourism business marketing of small, minority,
rural, and agritourism businesses in the state. The department,
in conjunction with the Florida Tourism Industry Marketing
Corporation, shall administer the program. The program shall
provide marketing plans, marketing assistance, promotional
support, media development, technical expertise, marketing
advice, technology training, social marketing support, and other
assistance to an eligible entity.
(2)      As used in this section, the term "eligible entity"
means an independently owned and operated business with gross
revenue not exceeding $1,250,000 or a nonprofit corporation that
meets the requirements of s. 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code.
(3)     The department and the Florida Tourism Industry
Marketing Corporation shall provide an annual report to the
Governor, the President of the Senate, and the Speaker of the
House of Representatives documenting that at least 50 percent of
the eligible entities receiving assistance through this program
are independently owned and operated businesses with gross
revenues not exceeding $500,000.
Section 19.           Section 288.124, Florida Statutes, is amended
to read:
288.124       Convention grants program.-- The Florida Tourism
Industry Marketing Corporation Enterprise Florida, Inc., is
authorized to establish a convention grants program and,
pursuant to that program, to recommend to the department
expenditures and contracts with local governments and nonprofit
corporations or organizations for the purpose of attracting
national conferences and conventions to Florida. Preference
shall be given to local governments and nonprofit corporations
or organizations seeking to attract minority conventions to
Florida. Minority conventions are events that primarily involve
minority persons, as defined in s. 288.703, who are residents or
nonresidents of the state. The Florida Tourism Industry
Marketing Corporation Enterprise Florida, Inc., shall establish
guidelines governing the award of grants and the administration
of this program. The department has final approval authority for
any grants under this section. The total annual allocation of
funds for this program shall not exceed $40,000.
Section 20.           Subsection (5) of section 288.901, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
288.901       Enterprise Florida, Inc.--
(5)      APPOINTED MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS.--
(a)      In addition to the Governor or his or her designee,
the board of directors shall consist of the following appointed
members:
1.      The Commissioner of Education or his or her designee.
2.      The Chief Financial Officer or his or her designee.
3.      The Attorney General or his or her designee.
4.      The Commissioner of Agriculture or his or her designee.
5.      The chairperson of the board of directors of
CareerSource Florida, Inc.
6.      The Secretary of State or his or her designee.
7.      Twelve members from the private sector, six of whom
shall be appointed by the Governor, three of whom shall be
appointed by the President of the Senate, and three of whom
shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of
Representatives. Members appointed by the Governor are subject
to Senate confirmation.
(b)      In making their appointments, the Governor, the
President of the Senate, and the Speaker of the House of
Representatives shall ensure that the composition of the board
of directors reflects the diversity of Florida's business
community and is representative of the economic development
goals in subsection (2). The board must include at least one
director for each of the following areas of expertise:
international business, tourism marketing, the space or
aerospace industry, managing or financing a minority-owned
business, manufacturing, finance and accounting, and sports
marketing.
(c)     The Governor, the President of the Senate, and the
Speaker of the House of Representatives also shall consider
appointees who reflect Florida's racial, ethnic, and gender
diversity. Efforts shall be taken to ensure participation from
all geographic areas of the state, including representation from
urban and rural communities.
(d)     Appointed members shall be appointed to 4-year terms,
except that initially, to provide for staggered terms, the
Governor, the President of the Senate, and the Speaker of the
House of Representatives shall each appoint one member to serve
a 2-year term and one member to serve a 3-year term, with the
remaining initial appointees serving 4-year terms. All
subsequent appointments shall be for 4-year terms.
(e)     Initial appointments must be made by October 1, 2011,
and be eligible for confirmation at the earliest available
Senate session. Terms end on September 30.
(f)     Any member is eligible for reappointment, except that
a member may not serve more than two terms.
(g)     A vacancy on the board of directors shall be filled
for the remainder of the unexpired term. Vacancies on the board
shall be filled by appointment by the Governor, the President of
the Senate, or the Speaker of the House of Representatives,
respectively, depending on who appointed the member whose
vacancy is to be filled or whose term has expired.
(h)     Appointed members may be removed by the Governor, the
President of the Senate, or the Speaker of the House of
Representatives, respectively, for cause. Absence from three
consecutive meetings results in automatic removal.
All Board members shall serve without compensation, but are
entitled to receive reimbursement for per diem and travel
expenses pursuant to s. 112.061. Such expenses must be paid out
of funds of Enterprise Florida, Inc.
Section 21.           Subsections (7), (8), and (9) are added to
section 288.903, Florida Statutes, to read:
288.903       Duties of Enterprise Florida, Inc.--Enterprise
Florida, Inc., shall have the following duties:
(7)     Submit all proposed contracts with a total cost of
$750,000 or more in accordance with the notice and review
procedures of s. 216.177. If the chair and vice chair of the
Legislative Budget Commission, or the President of the Senate
and the Speaker of the House of Representatives, timely advise
Enterprise Florida, Inc., in writing that such proposed contract
is contrary to legislative policy and intent, Enterprise
Florida, Inc., may not execute such proposed contract.
Enterprise Florida, Inc., may not enter into multiple related
contracts to avoid the requirements of this paragraph. This
paragraph does not apply to contracts for the award of a
statutorily authorized incentive program.
(8)     Shall not create or establish any other entity,
corporation, or direct-support organization, unless authorized
by law.
(9)     Enterprise Florida, Inc., shall comply with the per
diem and travel expense provisions of s. 112.061.
Section 22.           Section 288.904, Florida Statutes, is amended
to read:
288.904       Funding for Enterprise Florida, Inc.; performance
and return on the public's investment.--
(1)(a)       The Legislature may annually appropriate to
Enterprise Florida, Inc., a sum of money for its operations, and
separate line-item appropriations for each of the divisions
listed in s. 288.92.
(b)     The state's operating investment in Enterprise
Florida, Inc., and its divisions is the budget contracted by the
department to Enterprise Florida, Inc., less any funding that is
directed by the Legislature to be subcontracted to a specific
recipient entity.
(c)      The board of directors of Enterprise Florida, Inc.,
shall adopt for each upcoming fiscal year an operating budget
for the organization, including its divisions, which specifies
the intended uses of the state's operating investment and a plan
for securing private sector support.
(2)(a)       The Legislature finds that it is a priority to
maximize private sector support in operating Enterprise Florida,
Inc., and its divisions, as an endorsement of its value and as
an enhancement of its efforts. Thus, the state appropriations
must be matched with private sector support equal to at least
100 percent of the state operational funding.
(b)      Private sector support in operating Enterprise
Florida, Inc., and its divisions includes:
1.      Cash given directly to Enterprise Florida, Inc., for
its operations, including contributions from at-large members of
the board of directors;
2.      Cash donations from organizations assisted by the
divisions;
3.      Cash jointly raised by Enterprise Florida, Inc., and a
private local economic development organization, a group of such
organizations, or a statewide private business organization that
supports collaborative projects;
4.      Cash generated by fees charged for products or services
of Enterprise Florida, Inc., and its divisions by sponsorship of
events, missions, programs, and publications; and
5.      Copayments, stock, warrants, royalties, or other
private resources dedicated to Enterprise Florida, Inc., or its
divisions.
(c)      If Enterprise Florida, Inc., fails to meet the one-to-
one match requirements of this subsection, the corporation shall
revert all unmatched public contributions to the state treasury
by June 30 of each fiscal year.
(3)(a)       Specifically for the marketing and advertising
activities of the Division of Tourism Marketing or as contracted
through the Florida Tourism Industry Corporation, a one-to-one
match is required of private to public contributions within 4
calendar years after the implementation date of the marketing
plan pursuant to s. 288.923.
(b)      For purposes of calculating the required one-to-one
match, matching private funds shall be divided into four
categories. Documentation for the components of the four private
match categories shall be kept on file for inspection as
determined necessary. The four private match categories are:
1.      Direct cash contributions, which include, but are not
limited to, cash derived from strategic alliances, contributions
of stocks and bonds, and partnership contributions.
2.      Fees for services, which include, but are not limited
to, event participation, research, and brochure placement and
transparencies.
3.      Cooperative advertising, which is the value based on
cost of contributed productions, air time, and print space.
4.      In-kind contributions, which include, but are not
limited to, the value of strategic alliance services
contributed, the value of loaned employees, discounted service
fees, items contributed for use in promotions, and radio or
television air time or print space for promotions. The value of
air time or print space shall be calculated by taking the actual
time or space and multiplying by the nonnegotiated unit price
for that specific time or space which is known as the media
equivalency value. In order to avoid duplication in determining
media equivalency value, only the value of the promotion itself
shall be included; the value of the items contributed for the
promotion may not be included.
(4)      Enterprise Florida, Inc., shall fully comply with the
performance measures, standards, and sanctions in its contract
with the department, under s. 20.60. The department shall
ensure, to the maximum extent possible, that the contract
performance measures are consistent with performance measures
that it is required to develop and track under performance-based
program budgeting. The contract shall also include performance
measures for the divisions.
(4)(5)       The Legislature intends to review the performance
of Enterprise Florida, Inc., in achieving the performance goals
stated in its annual contract with the department to determine
whether the public is receiving a positive return on its
investment in Enterprise Florida, Inc., and its divisions. It
also is the intent of the Legislature that Enterprise Florida,
Inc., coordinate its operations with local economic development
organizations to maximize the state and local return on
investment to create jobs for Floridians.
(5)      By August 15 of each fiscal year, the Department of
Economic Opportunity shall submit a proposed operating budget
for Enterprise Florida, Inc., including amounts to be expended
on incentives, business recruitment, advertising, events, other
operating capital outlay, and salaries and benefits for each
employee to the Governor, the President of the Senate, and the
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
(6)(a)       All executed Enterprise Florida, Inc., contracts
are to be placed for viewing on the Enterprise Florida, Inc.,
website.
(b)      A contract entered into between Enterprise Florida,
Inc., and any other public or private entity shall include:
1.      The purpose of the contract.
2.      Specific performance standards and responsibilities for
each entity.
3.      A detailed project or contract budget, if applicable.
4.      The value of any services provided.
5.      The projected travel and entertainment expenses for
employees and board members, if applicable.
(c)1.       Any entity that in the previous fiscal year received
more than 50 percent of its revenue from Enterprise Florida,
Inc., or a tax imposed pursuant to s. 125.0104, s. 125.0108, or
s. 212.0305, and that partners with Enterprise Florida, Inc., in
a program or other activity offered by or in conjunction with
Enterprise, Florida, Inc., shall annually on July 1 report all
public and private financial data to the Governor, the President
of the Senate, and the Speaker of the House of Representatives,
and include such report on its website.
2.      The financial data shall include:
a.      The total amount of revenue received from public and
private sources.
b.      The operating budget of the partner entity.
c.      Employee and board member salary and benefit details
from public and private funds.
d.      An itemized account of all expenditures by the partner
entity on the behalf of, or coordinated for the benefit of,
Enterprise Florida, Inc., its board members, or employees.
e.      Itemized travel and entertainment expenditures of the
partner entity.
(d)      The following information must be posted on the
website of Enterprise Florida, Inc.:
1.      A plain language version of any contract that is
estimated to exceed $35,000 with a private entity, municipality,
city, town, or vendor of services, supplies, or programs,
including marketing, or for the purchase or lease or use of
lands, facilities, or properties.
2.      Any agreement entered into between Enterprise Florida,
Inc., and any other entity, including a local government,
private entity, or nonprofit entity, that receives public funds
or funds from a tax imposed pursuant to s. 125.0104, s.
125.0108, or s. 212.0305.
3.      The contracts and the required information pursuant to
paragraph (b) and the financial data submitted to Enterprise
Florida, Inc., pursuant to paragraph (c).
4.      Video recordings of each board meeting.
5.      A detailed report of expenditures following each
marketing or business recruitment event paid for with Enterprise
Florida, Inc., funds. Such report must be posted within 10
business days after the event.
6.      An annual itemized accounting of the total amount of
funds spent by any third party on behalf of Enterprise Florida,
Inc., or any board member or employee of Enterprise Florida,
Inc.
7.      An annual itemized accounting of the total amount of
travel and entertainment expenses by Enterprise Florida, Inc.
(e)      The Enterprise Florida, Inc., website must:
1.      Allow users to navigate to related sites to view
supporting details.
2.      Enable a taxpayer to email questions to Enterprise
Florida, Inc., and make such questions and Enterprise Florida,
Inc., responses publicly viewable.
Section 23.           Section 288.905, Florida Statutes, is amended
to read:
288.905       President and employees of Enterprise Florida,
Inc.--
(1)     The board of directors of Enterprise Florida, Inc.,
shall appoint a president, who shall serve at the pleasure of
the Governor. The president shall also be known as the
"secretary of commerce" and shall serve as the Governor's chief
negotiator for business recruitment and business expansion.
(2)     The president is the chief administrative and
operational officer of the board of directors and of Enterprise
Florida, Inc., and shall direct and supervise the administrative
affairs of the board of directors and any divisions, councils,
or boards. The board of directors may delegate to the president
those powers and responsibilities it deems appropriate,
including hiring and management of all staff, except for the
appointment of a president.
(3)     The board of directors shall establish and adjust the
president's compensation.
(4)     No employee of Enterprise Florida, Inc., including an
officer or agent, the president, or the chief executive officer,
may receive public compensation for employment that exceeds the
salary and benefits authorized to be paid to the Governor,
unless the board of directors and the employee have executed a
contract that prescribes specific, measurable performance
outcomes for the employee, the satisfaction of which provides
the basis for the award of incentive payments that increase the
employee's total compensation to a level above the salary paid
to the Governor. Any public payments of performance bonuses or
severance pay to employees are prohibited unless specifically
authorized by law.
(5)     Lodging expenses for an employee of Enterprise
Florida, Inc., may not exceed $150 per day, excluding taxes,
unless the corporation is participating in a negotiated group
rate discount or the corporation provides documentation of at
least three comparable alternatives demonstrating that such
lodging at the required rate is not available. However, an
employee of the corporation may expend his or her own funds for
any lodging expenses in excess of $150 per day.
(6)     Funds of Enterprise Florida, Inc., may not be expended
for food, beverages, lodging, entertainment, or gifts for
employees of the corporation, board members of the corporation,
or employees of a tourist or economic development entity that
receives revenue from a tax imposed pursuant to s. 125.0104, s.
125.0108, or s. 212.0305, unless authorized pursuant to s.
112.061 or this section. An employee or board member of
Enterprise Florida, Inc., may not accept or receive food,
beverages, lodging, entertainment, or gifts from a tourist or
economic development entity that receives revenue from a tax
imposed pursuant to s. 125.0104, s. 125.0108, or s. 212.0305, or
from any person, vendor, or other entity, doing business with
the corporation unless such food, beverage, lodging,
entertainment, or gift is available to similarly situated
members of the general public.
Section 24.           Paragraph (b) of subsection (2) of section
288.92, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
288.92       Divisions of Enterprise Florida, Inc.--
(2)
(b)1.       The following officers and board members are subject
to ss. 112.313(1)-(8), (10), (12), and (15); 112.3135; and
112.3143(2):
a.      Officers and members of the board of directors of the
divisions of Enterprise Florida, Inc.
b.      Officers and members of the board of directors of
subsidiaries of Enterprise Florida, Inc.
c.      Officers and members of the board of directors of
corporations created to carry out the missions of Enterprise
Florida, Inc.
d.      Officers and members of the board of directors of
corporations with which a division is required by law to
contract to carry out its missions.
2.      For purposes of applying ss. 112.313(1)-(8), (10),
(12), and (15); 112.3135; and 112.3143(2) to activities of the
officers and members of the board of directors specified in
subparagraph 1., those persons shall be considered public
officers or employees and the corporation shall be considered
their agency.
3.      It is not a violation of s. 112.3143(2) or (4) for the
officers or members of the board of directors of the Florida
Tourism Industry Marketing Corporation to:
a.      Vote on the 4-year marketing plan required under s.
288.923 or vote on any individual component of or amendment to
the plan.
b.      Participate in the establishment or calculation of
payments related to the private match requirements of s.
288.904(3). The officer or member must file an annual disclosure
describing the nature of his or her interests or the interests
of his or her principals, including corporate parents and
subsidiaries of his or her principal, in the private match
requirements. This annual disclosure requirement satisfies the
disclosure requirement of s. 112.3143(4). This disclosure must
be placed either on the Florida Tourism Industry Marketing
Corporation's website or included in the minutes of each meeting
of the Florida Tourism Industry Marketing Corporation's board of
directors at which the private match requirements are discussed
or voted upon.
Section 25.           Paragraph (d) of subsection (4) of section
288.923, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
288.923       Division of Tourism Marketing; definitions;
responsibilities.--
(4)      The division's responsibilities and duties include,
but are not limited to:
(d)      Drafting and submitting an annual report required by
s. 288.92. The annual report shall set forth for the division
and the direct-support organization:
1.      Operations and accomplishments during the fiscal year,
including the economic benefit of the state's investment and
effectiveness of the marketing plan.
2.      The 4-year marketing plan, including recommendations on
methods for implementing and funding the plan.
3.      The assets and liabilities of the direct-support
organization at the end of its most recent fiscal year.
4.      A copy of the annual financial and compliance audit
conducted under s. 288.1226(7) 288.1226(6).
Section 26.           For the 2017-2018 fiscal year, the recurring
sum of $26,000,000 and the nonrecurring sum of $26,000,000 from
the State Economic Enhancement and Development Trust Fund and
the recurring sum of $24,000,000 from the Tourism Promotional
Trust Fund are appropriated to the Department of Economic
Opportunity to enter into a contract with the Florida Tourism
Industry Marketing Corporation.
Section 27.           For the 2017-2018 fiscal year, the recurring
sum of $9,400,000 from the State Economic Enhancement and
Development Trust Fund and the recurring sum of $6,600,000 from
the Florida International Trade and Promotion Trust Fund are
appropriated to the Department of Economic Opportunity to enter
into a contract with Enterprise Florida, Inc., for operational
purposes and to maintain its offices but excluding expenditures
on any incentive tools or programs unless explicitly authorized
by this act. From the funds appropriated from the Florida
International Trade and Promotion Trust Fund, Enterprise
Florida, Inc., shall allocate $3,550,000 for international
programs, $2,050,000 to maintain Florida's international
offices, and $1,000,000 to continue the Florida Export
Diversification and Expansion Programs.
Section 28.           For the 2017-2018 fiscal year, the
nonrecurring sum of $60,000,000 from the State Economic
Enhancement and Development Trust Fund is appropriated to the
Department of Economic Opportunity to administer contracts
approved by the Governor for the Florida Job Growth Grant Fund
pursuant to section 15 of this act. For the 2017-2018 fiscal
year, the nonrecurring sum of $25,000,000 from the State
Transportation Trust Fund is appropriated to the Department of
Transportation to enter into an agreement with the Department of
Economic Opportunity to provide for infrastructure for contracts
approved by the Governor for the Florida Job Growth Grant Fund
pursuant to section 15 of this act. Additionally, the Executive
Office of the Governor is authorized to process one or more
budget amendments pursuant to s. 216.181(12), Florida Statutes,
in a total amount not to exceed $40,000,000 to provide for the
non-operating transfer of funds from the State Transportation
Trust Fund to the State Economic Enhancement and Development
Trust Fund to support expenditures for the Florida Job Growth
Grant Fund pursuant to section 15 of this act. No state
appropriated funds other than those appropriated in this section
may be expended on the Florida Job Growth Grant Fund.
Additionally, notwithstanding s. 216.292, Florida Statutes, the
funds appropriated herein are nontransferable. Notwithstanding
s. 216.301, Florida Statutes, and pursuant to s. 216.351,
Florida Statutes, the balance of any appropriation for the
Florida Job Growth Grant Fund which is not disbursed by June 30
of the fiscal year in which the funds are appropriated may be
carried forward for up to 5 years after the effective date of
the original appropriation.
Section 29.           This act shall take effect July 1, 2017.