A bill to be entitled
An act relating to public records; amending s.
381.987, F.S.; exempting from public records
requirements personal identifying information of
patients, caregivers, and physicians held by the
Department of Health in the medical marijuana use
registry and information related to the physician
certification for marijuana and the dispensing thereof
held by the department; authorizing specified persons
and entities access to the exempt information;
requiring that information released from the registry
or the department remain confidential and exempt;
providing a criminal penalty; providing for future
legislative review and repeal of the exemption;
providing a statement of public necessity; providing a
contingent effective date.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:
Section 1.         Section 381.987, Florida Statutes, is amended
to read:
381.987       Public records exemption for personal identifying
information relating to medical marijuana held by in the
department compassionate use registry.--
(1)     The following information is confidential and exempt
from s. 119.07(1) and s. 24(a), Art. I of the State
Constitution:
(a)     A patient's or caregiver's personal identifying
information held by the department in the medical marijuana
compassionate use registry established under s. 381.986,
including, but not limited to, the patient's or caregiver's
name, address, date of birth, photograph, and telephone number.
(b)     All personal identifying information collected for the
purpose of issuing a qualifying patient's or caregiver's medical
marijuana use registry identification card in accordance with s.
381.896., and government-issued identification number, and
(c)     All personal identifying information pertaining to the
physician certification physician's order for marijuana low-THC
cannabis and the dispensing thereof held by the department,
including, but not limited to, information related to the
patient's diagnosis, exception requests to the daily dose amount
limit, and the qualified patient's experience related to the
medical use of marijuana are confidential and exempt from s.
119.07(1) and s. 24(a), Art. I of the State Constitution.
(d)(2)       A qualified physician's Drug Enforcement
Administration number, residential address, and government-
issued identification card identifying information held by the
department in the compassionate use registry established under
s. 381.986, including, but not limited to, the physician's name,
address, telephone number, government-issued identification
number, and Drug Enforcement Administration number, and all
information pertaining to the physician's order for low-THC
cannabis and the dispensing thereof are confidential and exempt
from s. 119.07(1) and s. 24(a), Art. I of the State
Constitution.
(2)(3)       The department shall allow access to the registry,
including access to confidential and exempt information in the
medical marijuana use registry, to:
(a)     A law enforcement agency that is investigating a
violation of law regarding marijuana cannabis in which the
subject of the investigation claims an exception established
under s. 381.986, except for information related to the
patient's diagnosis.
(b)     A medical marijuana treatment center dispensing
organization approved by the department pursuant to s. 381.986
which is attempting to verify the authenticity of a physician
certification physician's order for marijuana low-THC cannabis,
including whether the certification order had been previously
filled and whether the certification order was issued written
for the person attempting to have it filled, except for
information related to the patient's diagnosis.
(c)     A physician who has issued a certification for
marijuana written an order for low-THC cannabis for the purpose
of monitoring the patient's use of such marijuana cannabis or
for the purpose of determining, before issuing a certification
an order for marijuana low-THC cannabis, whether another
physician has issued a certification for ordered the patient's
use of marijuana low-THC cannabis. The physician may access the
confidential and exempt information only for the patient for
whom he or she has issued a certification ordered or is
determining whether to issue a certification for order the use
of marijuana low-THC cannabis pursuant to s. 381.986.
(d)     A practitioner licensed to prescribe prescription
medications to ensure proper care for a patient before
prescribing medication that may interact with marijuana.
(e)(d)       An employee of the department for the purposes of
maintaining the registry and periodic reporting or disclosure of
information that has been redacted to exclude personal
identifying information.
(f)     An employee of the department for the purpose of
monitoring physician registration in the registry and the
issuance of physician certifications for practices that could
facilitate unlawful diversion or misuse of marijuana or a
marijuana delivery device.
(g)(e)       The department's relevant health care regulatory
boards responsible for the licensure, regulation, or discipline
of a physician if he or she is involved in a specific
investigation of a violation of s. 381.986. If a health care
regulatory board's investigation reveals potential criminal
activity, the board may provide any relevant information to the
appropriate law enforcement agency.
(h)      The Coalition for Medical Marijuana Research and
Education established in s. 1004.4351(4).
(i)(f)       A person engaged in bona fide research if the
person agrees:
1.      To submit a research plan to the department which
specifies the exact nature of the information requested and the
intended use of the information;
2.      To maintain the confidentiality of the records or
information if personal identifying information is made
available to the researcher;
3.      To destroy any confidential and exempt records or
information obtained after the research is concluded; and
4.      Not to contact, directly or indirectly, for any
purpose, a patient or physician whose information is in the
registry.
(3)      The department shall allow access to the confidential
and exempt information pertaining to the physician certification
for marijuana and the dispensing thereof, whether in the
registry or otherwise held by the department, to:
(a)      An employee of the department for the purpose of
approving or disapproving a request for an exception to the
daily dose amount limit for a qualified patient; and
(b)      The Coalition for Medical Marijuana Research and
Education pursuant to s. 381.986 for the purpose of conducting
research regarding the medical use of marijuana.
(4)     All information released by the department from the
registry under subsections subsection (2) and (3) remains
confidential and exempt, and a person who receives access to
such information must maintain the confidential and exempt
status of the information received.
(5)     A person who willfully and knowingly violates this
section commits a felony of the third degree, punishable as
provided in s. 775.082 or, s. 775.083, or s. 775.084.
(6)     This section is subject to the Open Government Sunset
Review Act in accordance with s. 119.15 and shall stand repealed
on October 2, 2022 2019, unless reviewed and saved from repeal
through reenactment by the Legislature.
Section 2.         The Legislature finds that it is a public
necessity that personal identifying information of patients,
caregivers, and physicians held by the Department of Health in
the medical marijuana use registry established under s. 381.986,
Florida Statutes, be made confidential and exempt from s.
119.07(1), Florida Statutes, and s. 24(a), Article I of the
State Constitution. The Legislature further finds that it is a
public necessity to make confidential and exempt from s.
119.07(1), Florida Statutes, and s. 24(a), Article I of the
State Constitution all personal identifying information held in
the medical marijuana use registry or by the department which
pertains to a physician certification for marijuana and the
dispensing thereof pursuant to s. 381.986, Florida Statutes. The
choice made by a physician to certify, and by his or her patient
to use, marijuana to treat the patient's medical condition or
symptoms and the choice made by a caregiver to assist a
qualifying patient with the medical use of marijuana is a
personal and private matter between such parties. The
availability of such information could make the public aware of
both the patient's use of marijuana and the patient's diseases
or other medical conditions for which the patient is using
marijuana. The knowledge of the patient's use of marijuana, the
knowledge that the physician certified the use of marijuana, the
knowledge of the patient's diseases or other medical conditions,
and the knowledge that a caregiver is assisting a patient with
the medical use of marijuana could be used to embarrass,
humiliate, harass, or discriminate against the patient, the
caregiver, or the physician. This information could be used as a
discriminatory tool by an employer who disapproves of the
patient's use of marijuana, the caregiver's assistance in the
use of marijuana, or the physician certification of such use.
However, despite the potential hazards of collecting such
information, maintaining the medical marijuana use registry
established under s. 381.986, Florida Statutes, and collecting
information pertaining to the physician certification for
marijuana is necessary to prevent the diversion and nonmedical
use of marijuana as well as to aid and improve research on the
efficacy of marijuana. Therefore, the Legislature finds that it
is a public necessity to make confidential and exempt from
public records requirements the personal identifying information
of patients, caregivers, and physicians held by the Department
of Health in the medical marijuana use registry established
under s. 381.986, Florida Statutes, and all personal identifying
information held in the registry or by the department that
pertains to a physician certification for marijuana and the
dispensing thereof pursuant to s. 381.986, Florida Statutes.
Section 3.         This act shall take effect on the same date
that HB 5A or similar legislation takes effect, if such
legislation is adopted in the same legislative session or an
extension thereof and becomes a law.