A bill to be entitled                      
An act implementing SB 2500-A, an act making
supplemental appropriations to fund the Florida
Education Finance Program for the 2017-2018 fiscal
year; amending ss. 24.121, 1011.62, 1011.67, 1011.685,
1011.71, and 1012.71, F.S.; authorizing the
distribution of funds for the Florida Education
Finance Program pursuant to any law providing funding
for the 2017-2018 fiscal year; providing for
construction of the act in pari materia with laws
enacted during the 2017 Regular Session of the
Legislature; providing effective dates.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:

Section 1. Paragraph (c) of subsection (5) of section
24.121, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
24.121 Allocation of revenues and expenditure of funds for
public education.—
(5)
(c) A portion of such net revenues, as determined annually
by the Legislature, shall be distributed to each school district
and shall be made available to each public school in the
district for enhancing school performance through development
and implementation of a school improvement plan pursuant to s.
1001.42(18). A portion of these moneys, as determined annually
in the General Appropriations Act or in any law providing
funding for the Florida Education Finance Program for the 2017
2018 fiscal year, must be allocated to each school in an equal
amount for each student enrolled. These moneys may be expended
only on programs or projects selected by the school advisory
council or by a parent advisory committee created pursuant to
this paragraph. If a school does not have a school advisory
council, the district advisory council must appoint a parent
advisory committee composed of parents of students enrolled in
that school, which is representative of the ethnic, racial, and
economic community served by the school, to advise the school’s
principal on the programs or projects to be funded. Neither
school district staff nor principals may override the
recommendations of the school advisory council or the parent
advisory committee. These moneys may not be used for capital
improvements or for any project or program that has a duration
of more than 1 year; however, a school advisory council or
parent advisory committee may independently determine that a
program or project formerly funded under this paragraph should
receive funds in a subsequent year.
Section 2. Upon the expiration and reversion of the
amendments to section 1011.62, Florida Statutes, pursuant to
section 23 of chapter 2016-62, Laws of Florida, section 1011.62,
Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
1011.62 Funds for operation of schools.—If the annual
allocation from the Florida Education Finance Program to each
district for operation of schools is not determined in the
annual appropriations act or the substantive bill implementing
the annual appropriations act or in any law providing funding
for the Florida Education Finance Program for the 2017-2018
fiscal year, it shall be determined as follows:
(1) COMPUTATION OF THE BASIC AMOUNT TO BE INCLUDED FOR
OPERATION.—The following procedure shall be followed in
determining the annual allocation to each district for
operation:
(a) Determination of full-time equivalent membership.
During each of several school weeks, including scheduled
intersessions of a year-round school program during the fiscal
year, a program membership survey of each school shall be made
by each district by aggregating the full-time equivalent student
membership of each program by school and by district. The
department shall establish the number and interval of membership
calculations, except that for basic and special programs such
calculations shall not exceed nine for any fiscal year. The
district’s full-time equivalent membership shall be computed and
currently maintained in accordance with regulations of the
commissioner.
(b) Determination of base student allocation.—The base
student allocation for the Florida Education Finance Program for
kindergarten through grade 12 shall be determined annually by
the Legislature and shall be that amount prescribed in the
current year’s General Appropriations Act or in any law
providing funding for the Florida Education Finance Program for
the 2017-2018 fiscal year.
(c) Determination of programs.—Cost factors based on
desired relative cost differences between the following programs
shall be established in the annual General Appropriations Act or
in any law providing funding for the Florida Education Finance
Program for the 2017-2018 fiscal year. The cost factor for
secondary career education programs and basic programs grade 9
through 12 shall be equal. The Commissioner of Education shall
specify a matrix of services and intensity levels to be used by
districts in the determination of the two weighted cost factors
for exceptional students with the highest levels of need. For
these students, the funding support level shall fund the
exceptional students’ education program, with the exception of
extended school year services for students with disabilities.
1. Basic programs.—
a. Kindergarten and grades 1, 2, and 3.
b. Grades 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8.
c. Grades 9, 10, 11, and 12.
2. Programs for exceptional students.—
a. Support Level IV.
b. Support Level V.
3. Secondary career education programs.
4. English for Speakers of Other Languages.
(d) Annual allocation calculation.—
1. The Department of Education is authorized and directed
to review all district programs and enrollment projections and
calculate a maximum total weighted full-time equivalent student
enrollment for each district for the K-12 FEFP.
2. Maximum enrollments calculated by the department shall
be derived from enrollment estimates used by the Legislature to
calculate the FEFP. If two or more districts enter into an
agreement under the provisions of s. 1001.42(4)(d), after the
final enrollment estimate is agreed upon, the amount of FTE
specified in the agreement, not to exceed the estimate for the
specific program as identified in paragraph (c), may be
transferred from the participating districts to the district
providing the program.
3. As part of its calculation of each district’s maximum
total weighted full-time equivalent student enrollment, the
department shall establish separate enrollment ceilings for each
of two program groups. Group 1 shall be composed of basic
programs for grades K-3, grades 4-8, and grades 9-12. Group 2
shall be composed of students in exceptional student education
programs support levels IV and V, English for Speakers of Other
Languages programs, and all career programs in grades 9-12.
a. For any calculation of the FEFP, the enrollment ceiling
for group 1 shall be calculated by multiplying the actual
enrollment for each program in the program group by its
appropriate program weight.
b. The weighted enrollment ceiling for group 2 programs
shall be calculated by multiplying the enrollment for each
program by the appropriate program weight as provided in the
General Appropriations Act or in any law providing funding for
the Florida Education Finance Program for the 2017-2018 fiscal
year. The weighted enrollment ceiling for program group 2 shall
be the sum of the weighted enrollment ceilings for each program
in the program group, plus the increase in weighted full-time
equivalent student membership from the prior year for clients of
the Department of Children and Families and the Department of
Juvenile Justice.
c. If, for any calculation of the FEFP, the weighted
enrollment for program group 2, derived by multiplying actual
enrollments by appropriate program weights, exceeds the
enrollment ceiling for that group, the following procedure shall
be followed to reduce the weighted enrollment for that group to
equal the enrollment ceiling:
(I) The weighted enrollment ceiling for each program in the
program group shall be subtracted from the weighted enrollment
for that program derived from actual enrollments.
(II) If the difference calculated under sub-sub
subparagraph (I) is greater than zero for any program, a
reduction proportion shall be computed for the program by
dividing the absolute value of the difference by the total
amount by which the weighted enrollment for the program group
exceeds the weighted enrollment ceiling for the program group.
(III) The reduction proportion calculated under sub-sub
subparagraph (II) shall be multiplied by the total amount of the
program group’s enrollment over the ceiling as calculated under
sub-sub-subparagraph (I).
(IV) The prorated reduction amount calculated under sub
sub-subparagraph (III) shall be subtracted from the program’s
weighted enrollment to produce a revised program weighted
enrollment.
(V) The prorated reduction amount calculated under sub-sub
subparagraph (III) shall be divided by the appropriate program
weight, and the result shall be added to the revised program
weighted enrollment computed in sub-sub-subparagraph (IV).
(e) Funding model for exceptional student education
programs.—
1.a. The funding model uses basic, at-risk, support levels
IV and V for exceptional students and career Florida Education
Finance Program cost factors, and a guaranteed allocation for
exceptional student education programs. Exceptional education
cost factors are determined by using a matrix of services to
document the services that each exceptional student will
receive. The nature and intensity of the services indicated on
the matrix shall be consistent with the services described in
each exceptional student’s individual educational plan. The
Department of Education shall review and revise the descriptions
of the services and supports included in the matrix of services
for exceptional students and shall implement those revisions
before the beginning of the 2012-2013 school year.
b. In order to generate funds using one of the two weighted
cost factors, a matrix of services must be completed at the time
of the student’s initial placement into an exceptional student
education program and at least once every 3 years by personnel
who have received approved training. Nothing listed in the
matrix shall be construed as limiting the services a school
district must provide in order to ensure that exceptional
students are provided a free, appropriate public education.
c. Students identified as exceptional, in accordance with
chapter 6A-6, Florida Administrative Code, who do not have a
matrix of services as specified in sub-subparagraph b. shall
generate funds on the basis of full-time-equivalent student
membership in the Florida Education Finance Program at the same
funding level per student as provided for basic students.
Additional funds for these exceptional students will be provided
through the guaranteed allocation designated in subparagraph 2.
2. For students identified as exceptional who do not have a
matrix of services and students who are gifted in grades K
through 8, there is created a guaranteed allocation to provide
these students with a free appropriate public education, in
accordance with s. 1001.42(4)(l) and rules of the State Board of
Education, which shall be allocated initially to each school
district in the amount provided in the General Appropriations
Act or in any law providing funding for the Florida Education
Finance Program for the 2017-2018 fiscal year. These funds shall
be supplemental to the funds appropriated for the basic funding
level, and the amount allocated for each school district shall
be recalculated once during the year, based on actual student
membership from the October FTE survey. Upon recalculation, if
the generated allocation is greater than the amount provided in
the General Appropriations Act or in any law providing funding
for the Florida Education Finance Program for the 2017-2018
fiscal year, the total shall be prorated to the level of the
appropriation based on each district’s share of the total
recalculated amount. These funds shall be used to provide
special education and related services for exceptional students
and students who are gifted in grades K through 8. A district’s
expenditure of funds from the guaranteed allocation for students
in grades 9 through 12 who are gifted may not be greater than
the amount expended during the 2006-2007 Fiscal Year for gifted
students in grades 9 through 12.
(f) Supplemental academic instruction; categorical fund.—
1. There is created a categorical fund to provide
supplemental academic instruction to students in kindergarten
through grade 12. This paragraph may be cited as the
“Supplemental Academic Instruction Categorical Fund.”
2. Categorical funds for supplemental academic instruction
shall be allocated annually to each school district in the
amount provided in the General Appropriations Act or in any law
providing funding for the Florida Education Finance Program for
the 2017-2018 fiscal year. These funds shall be in addition to
the funds appropriated on the basis of FTE student membership in
the Florida Education Finance Program and shall be included in
the total potential funds of each district. These funds shall be
used to provide supplemental academic instruction to students
enrolled in the K-12 program. For the 2014-2015 fiscal year,
each school district that has one or more of the 300 lowest
performing elementary schools based on the state reading
assessment shall use these funds, together with the funds
provided in the district’s research-based reading instruction
allocation and other available funds, to provide an additional
hour of instruction beyond the normal school day for each day of
the entire school year for intensive reading instruction for the
students in each of these schools. This additional hour of
instruction must be provided by teachers or reading specialists
who are effective in teaching reading or by a K-5 mentoring
reading program that is supervised by a teacher who is effective
at teaching reading. Students enrolled in these schools who have
level 5 assessment scores may participate in the additional hour
of instruction on an optional basis. Exceptional student
education centers shall not be included in the 300 schools.
After this requirement has been met, supplemental instruction
strategies may include, but are not limited to: modified
curriculum, reading instruction, after-school instruction,
tutoring, mentoring, class size reduction, extended school year,
intensive skills development in summer school, and other methods
for improving student achievement. Supplemental instruction may
be provided to a student in any manner and at any time during or
beyond the regular 180-day term identified by the school as
being the most effective and efficient way to best help that
student progress from grade to grade and to graduate.
3. Effective with the 1999-2000 fiscal year, funding on the
basis of FTE membership beyond the 180-day regular term shall be
provided in the FEFP only for students enrolled in juvenile
justice education programs or in education programs for
juveniles placed in secure facilities or programs under s.
985.19. Funding for instruction beyond the regular 180-day
school year for all other K-12 students shall be provided
through the supplemental academic instruction categorical fund
and other state, federal, and local fund sources with ample
flexibility for schools to provide supplemental instruction to
assist students in progressing from grade to grade and
graduating.
4. The Florida State University School, as a lab school, is
authorized to expend from its FEFP or Lottery Enhancement Trust
Fund allocation the cost to the student of remediation in
reading, writing, or mathematics for any graduate who requires
remediation at a postsecondary educational institution.
5. Beginning in the 1999-2000 school year, dropout
prevention programs as defined in ss. 1003.52, 1003.53(1)(a),
(b), and (c), and 1003.54 shall be included in group 1 programs
under subparagraph (d)3.
(g) Education for speakers of other languages.—A school
district or a full-time virtual instruction program is eligible
to report full-time equivalent student membership in the ESOL
program in the Florida Education Finance Program provided the
following conditions are met:
1. The school district or the full-time virtual instruction
program has a plan approved by the Department of Education.
2. The eligible student is identified and assessed as
limited English proficient based on assessment criteria.
3.a. An eligible student may be reported for funding in the
ESOL program for a base period of 3 years. However, a student
whose English competency does not meet the criteria for
proficiency after 3 years in the ESOL program may be reported
for a fourth, fifth, and sixth year of funding, provided his or
her limited English proficiency is assessed and properly
documented prior to his or her enrollment in each additional
year beyond the 3-year base period.
b. If a student exits the program and is later reclassified
as limited English proficient, the student may be reported in
the ESOL program for funding for an additional year, or extended
annually for a period not to exceed a total of 6 years pursuant
to this paragraph, based on an annual evaluation of the
student’s status.
4. An eligible student may be reported for funding in the
ESOL program for membership in ESOL instruction in English and
ESOL instruction or home language instruction in the basic
subject areas of mathematics, science, social studies, and
computer literacy.
(h) Small, isolated high schools.—Districts which levy the
maximum nonvoted discretionary millage, exclusive of millage for
capital outlay purposes levied pursuant to s. 1011.71(2), may
calculate full-time equivalent students for small, isolated high
schools by multiplying the number of unweighted full-time
equivalent students times 2.75; provided the school has attained
a grade of “C” or better, pursuant to s. 1008.34, for the
previous school year. For the purpose of this section, the term
“small, isolated high school” means any high school which is
located no less than 28 miles by the shortest route from another
high school; which has been serving students primarily in basic
studies provided by sub-subparagraphs (c)1.b. and c. and may
include subparagraph (c)4.; and which has a membership of no
more than 100 students, but no fewer than 28 students, in grades
9 through 12.
(i) Calculation of full-time equivalent membership with
respect to dual enrollment instruction.—Students enrolled in
dual enrollment instruction pursuant to s. 1007.271 may be
included in calculations of full-time equivalent student
memberships for basic programs for grades 9 through 12 by a
district school board. Instructional time for dual enrollment
may vary from 900 hours; however, the full-time equivalent
student membership value shall be subject to the provisions in
s. 1011.61(4). Dual enrollment full-time equivalent student
membership shall be calculated in an amount equal to the hours
of instruction that would be necessary to earn the full-time
equivalent student membership for an equivalent course if it
were taught in the school district. Students in dual enrollment
courses may also be calculated as the proportional shares of
full-time equivalent enrollments they generate for a Florida
College System institution or university conducting the dual
enrollment instruction. Early admission students shall be
considered dual enrollments for funding purposes. Students may
be enrolled in dual enrollment instruction provided by an
eligible independent college or university and may be included
in calculations of full-time equivalent student memberships for
basic programs for grades 9 through 12 by a district school
board. However, those provisions of law which exempt dual
enrolled and early admission students from payment of
instructional materials and tuition and fees, including
laboratory fees, shall not apply to students who select the
option of enrolling in an eligible independent institution. An
independent college or university which is located and chartered
in Florida, is not for profit, is accredited by the Commission
on Colleges of the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools
or the Accrediting Council for Independent Colleges and Schools,
and confers degrees as defined in s. 1005.02 shall be eligible
for inclusion in the dual enrollment or early admission program.
Students enrolled in dual enrollment instruction shall be exempt
from the payment of tuition and fees, including laboratory fees.
No student enrolled in college credit mathematics or English
dual enrollment instruction shall be funded as a dual enrollment
unless the student has successfully completed the relevant
section of the entry-level examination required pursuant to s.
1008.30.
(j) Instruction in exploratory career education.—Students
in grades 7 through 12 who are enrolled for more than four
semesters in exploratory career education may not be counted as
full-time equivalent students for this instruction.
(k) Study hall.—A student who is enrolled in study hall may
not be included in the calculation of full-time equivalent
student membership for funding under this section.
(l) Calculation of additional full-time equivalent
membership based on International Baccalaureate examination
scores of students.—A value of 0.16 full-time equivalent student
membership shall be calculated for each student enrolled in an
International Baccalaureate course who receives a score of 4 or
higher on a subject examination. A value of 0.3 full-time
equivalent student membership shall be calculated for each
student who receives an International Baccalaureate diploma.
Such value shall be added to the total full-time equivalent
student membership in basic programs for grades 9 through 12 in
the subsequent fiscal year. Each school district shall allocate
80 percent of the funds received from International
Baccalaureate bonus FTE funding to the school program whose
students generate the funds and to school programs that prepare
prospective students to enroll in International Baccalaureate
courses. Funds shall be expended solely for the payment of
allowable costs associated with the International Baccalaureate
program. Allowable costs include International Baccalaureate
annual school fees; International Baccalaureate examination
fees; salary, benefits, and bonuses for teachers and program
coordinators for the International Baccalaureate program and
teachers and coordinators who prepare prospective students for
the International Baccalaureate program; supplemental books;
instructional supplies; instructional equipment or instructional
materials for International Baccalaureate courses; other
activities that identify prospective International Baccalaureate
students or prepare prospective students to enroll in
International Baccalaureate courses; and training or
professional development for International Baccalaureate
teachers. School districts shall allocate the remaining 20
percent of the funds received from International Baccalaureate
bonus FTE funding for programs that assist academically
disadvantaged students to prepare for more rigorous courses. The
school district shall distribute to each classroom teacher who
provided International Baccalaureate instruction:
1. A bonus in the amount of $50 for each student taught by
the International Baccalaureate teacher in each International
Baccalaureate course who receives a score of 4 or higher on the
International Baccalaureate examination.
2. An additional bonus of $500 to each International
Baccalaureate teacher in a school designated with a grade of “D”
or “F” who has at least one student scoring 4 or higher on the
International Baccalaureate examination, regardless of the
number of classes taught or of the number of students scoring a
4 or higher on the International Baccalaureate examination.

Bonuses awarded to a teacher according to this paragraph may not
exceed $2,000 in any given school year. However, the maximum
bonus shall be $3,000 if at least 50 percent of the students
enrolled in a teacher’s course earn a score of 4 or higher on
the examination in a school designated with a grade of “A,” “B,”
or “C”; or if at least 25 percent of the students enrolled in a
teacher’s course earn a score of 4 or higher on the examination
in a school designated with a grade of “D” or “F.” Bonuses
awarded under this paragraph shall be in addition to any regular
wage or other bonus the teacher received or is scheduled to
receive. For such courses, the teacher shall earn an additional
bonus of $50 for each student who has a qualifying score up to
the maximum of $3,000 in any given school year.
(m) Calculation of additional full-time equivalent
membership based on Advanced International Certificate of
Education examination scores of students.—A value of 0.16 full
time equivalent student membership shall be calculated for each
student enrolled in a full-credit Advanced International
Certificate of Education course who receives a score of E or
higher on a subject examination. A value of 0.08 full-time
equivalent student membership shall be calculated for each
student enrolled in a half-credit Advanced International
Certificate of Education course who receives a score of E or
higher on a subject examination. A value of 0.3 full-time
equivalent student membership shall be calculated for each
student who receives an Advanced International Certificate of
Education diploma. Such value shall be added to the total full
time equivalent student membership in basic programs for grades
9 through 12 in the subsequent fiscal year. The school district
shall distribute to each classroom teacher who provided Advanced
International Certificate of Education instruction:
1. A bonus in the amount of $50 for each student taught by
the Advanced International Certificate of Education teacher in
each full-credit Advanced International Certificate of Education
course who receives a score of E or higher on the Advanced
International Certificate of Education examination. A bonus in
the amount of $25 for each student taught by the Advanced
International Certificate of Education teacher in each half
credit Advanced International Certificate of Education course
who receives a score of E or higher on the Advanced
International Certificate of Education examination.
2. An additional bonus of $500 to each Advanced
International Certificate of Education teacher in a school
designated with a grade of “D” or “F” who has at least one
student scoring E or higher on the full-credit Advanced
International Certificate of Education examination, regardless
of the number of classes taught or of the number of students
scoring an E or higher on the full-credit Advanced International
Certificate of Education examination.
3. Additional bonuses of $250 each to teachers of half
credit Advanced International Certificate of Education classes
in a school designated with a grade of “D” or “F” which has at
least one student scoring an E or higher on the half-credit
Advanced International Certificate of Education examination in
that class. The maximum additional bonus for a teacher awarded
in accordance with this subparagraph shall not exceed $500 in
any given school year. Teachers receiving an award under
subparagraph 2. are not eligible for a bonus under this
subparagraph.

Bonuses awarded to a teacher according to this paragraph shall
not exceed $2,000 in any given school year and shall be in
addition to any regular wage or other bonus the teacher received
or is scheduled to receive.
(n) Calculation of additional full-time equivalent
membership based on college board advanced placement scores of
students.—A value of 0.16 full-time equivalent student
membership shall be calculated for each student in each advanced
placement course who receives a score of 3 or higher on the
College Board Advanced Placement Examination for the prior year
and added to the total full-time equivalent student membership
in basic programs for grades 9 through 12 in the subsequent
fiscal year. Each district must allocate at least 80 percent of
the funds provided to the district for advanced placement
instruction, in accordance with this paragraph, to the high
school that generates the funds. The school district shall
distribute to each classroom teacher who provided advanced
placement instruction:
1. A bonus in the amount of $50 for each student taught by
the Advanced Placement teacher in each advanced placement course
who receives a score of 3 or higher on the College Board
Advanced Placement Examination.
2. An additional bonus of $500 to each Advanced Placement
teacher in a school designated with a grade of “D” or “F” who
has at least one student scoring 3 or higher on the College
Board Advanced Placement Examination, regardless of the number
of classes taught or of the number of students scoring a 3 or
higher on the College Board Advanced Placement Examination.

Bonuses awarded to a teacher according to this paragraph shall
not exceed $2,000 in any given school year. However, the maximum
bonus shall be $3,000 if at least 50 percent of the students
enrolled in a teacher’s course earn a score of 3 or higher on
the examination in a school with a grade of “A,” “B,” or “C” or
if at least 25 percent of the students enrolled in a teacher’s
course earn a score of 3 or higher on the examination in a
school with a grade of “D” or “F.” Bonuses awarded under this
paragraph shall be in addition to any regular wage or other
bonus the teacher received or is scheduled to receive. For such
courses, the teacher shall earn an additional bonus of $50 for
each student who has a qualifying score up to the maximum of
$3,000 in any given school year.
(o) Calculation of additional full-time equivalent
membership based on successful completion of a career-themed
course pursuant to ss. 1003.491, 1003.492, and 1003.493, or
courses with embedded CAPE industry certifications or CAPE
Digital Tool certificates, and issuance of industry
certification identified on the CAPE Industry Certification
Funding List pursuant to rules adopted by the State Board of
Education or CAPE Digital Tool certificates pursuant to s.
1003.4203.—
1.a. A value of 0.025 full-time equivalent student
membership shall be calculated for CAPE Digital Tool
certificates earned by students in elementary and middle school
grades.
b. A value of 0.1 or 0.2 full-time equivalent student
membership shall be calculated for each student who completes a
course as defined in s. 1003.493(1)(b) or courses with embedded
CAPE industry certifications and who is issued an industry
certification identified annually on the CAPE Industry
Certification Funding List approved under rules adopted by the
State Board of Education. A value of 0.2 full-time equivalent
membership shall be calculated for each student who is issued a
CAPE industry certification that has a statewide articulation
agreement for college credit approved by the State Board of
Education. For CAPE industry certifications that do not
articulate for college credit, the Department of Education shall
assign a full-time equivalent value of 0.1 for each
certification. Middle grades students who earn additional FTE
membership for a CAPE Digital Tool certificate pursuant to sub
subparagraph a. may not use the previously funded examination to
satisfy the requirements for earning an industry certification
under this sub-subparagraph. Additional FTE membership for an
elementary or middle grades student may not exceed 0.1 for
certificates or certifications earned within the same fiscal
year. The State Board of Education shall include the assigned
values on the CAPE Industry Certification Funding List under
rules adopted by the state board. Such value shall be added to
the total full-time equivalent student membership for grades 6
through 12 in the subsequent year. CAPE industry certifications
earned through dual enrollment must be reported and funded
pursuant to s. 1011.80. However, if a student earns a
certification through a dual enrollment course and the
certification is not a fundable certification on the
postsecondary certification funding list, or the dual enrollment
certification is earned as a result of an agreement between a
school district and a nonpublic postsecondary institution, the
bonus value shall be funded in the same manner as other nondual
enrollment course industry certifications. In such cases, the
school district may provide for an agreement between the high
school and the technical center, or the school district and the
postsecondary institution may enter into an agreement for
equitable distribution of the bonus funds.
c. A value of 0.3 full-time equivalent student membership
shall be calculated for student completion of the courses and
the embedded certifications identified on the CAPE Industry
Certification Funding List and approved by the commissioner
pursuant to ss. 1003.4203(5)(a) and 1008.44.
d. A value of 0.5 full-time equivalent student membership
shall be calculated for CAPE Acceleration Industry
Certifications that articulate for 15 to 29 college credit
hours, and 1.0 full-time equivalent student membership shall be
calculated for CAPE Acceleration Industry Certifications that
articulate for 30 or more college credit hours pursuant to CAPE
Acceleration Industry Certifications approved by the
commissioner pursuant to ss. 1003.4203(5)(b) and 1008.44.
2. Each district must allocate at least 80 percent of the
funds provided for CAPE industry certification, in accordance
with this paragraph, to the program that generated the funds.
This allocation may not be used to supplant funds provided for
basic operation of the program.
3. For CAPE industry certifications earned in the 2013-2014
school year and in subsequent years, the school district shall
distribute to each classroom teacher who provided direct
instruction toward the attainment of a CAPE industry
certification that qualified for additional full-time equivalent
membership under subparagraph 1.:
a. A bonus of $25 for each student taught by a teacher who
provided instruction in a course that led to the attainment of a
CAPE industry certification on the CAPE Industry Certification
Funding List with a weight of 0.1.
b. A bonus of $50 for each student taught by a teacher who
provided instruction in a course that led to the attainment of a
CAPE industry certification on the CAPE Industry Certification
Funding List with a weight of 0.2.
c. A bonus of $75 for each student taught by a teacher who
provided instruction in a course that led to the attainment of a
CAPE industry certification on the CAPE Industry Certification
Funding List with a weight of 0.3.
d. A bonus of $100 for each student taught by a teacher who
provided instruction in a course that led to the attainment of a
CAPE industry certification on the CAPE Industry Certification
Funding List with a weight of 0.5 or 1.0.

Bonuses awarded pursuant to this paragraph shall be provided to
teachers who are employed by the district in the year in which
the additional FTE membership calculation is included in the
calculation. Bonuses shall be calculated based upon the
associated weight of a CAPE industry certification on the CAPE
Industry Certification Funding List for the year in which the
certification is earned by the student. Any bonus awarded to a
teacher under this paragraph may not exceed $3,000 in any given
school year and is in addition to any regular wage or other
bonus the teacher received or is scheduled to receive.
(p) Calculation of additional full-time equivalent
membership based upon early high school graduation.— Each school
district may receive funding for each student who graduates
early pursuant to s. 1003.4281. A district may earn 0.25
additional FTE for a student who graduates one semester in
advance of the student’s cohort and 0.5 additional FTE for a
student who graduates 1 year or more in advance of the student’s
cohort. If the student was enrolled in the district as a full
time high school student for at least 2 years, the district
shall report the additional FTE for payment in the subsequent
fiscal year. If the student was enrolled in the district for
less than 2 years, the district of enrollment shall report the
additional FTE and shall transfer a proportionate share of the
funds earned for early graduation to the district in which the
student was previously enrolled. Additional FTE included in the
2014-2015 Florida Education Finance Program for early graduation
shall be reported and funded pursuant to this paragraph.
(q) Year-round-school programs.—The Commissioner of
Education is authorized to adjust student eligibility
definitions, funding criteria, and reporting requirements of
statutes and rules in order that year-round-school programs may
achieve equivalent application of funding requirements with non
year-round-school programs.
(r) Extended-school-year program.—It is the intent of the
Legislature that students be provided additional instruction by
extending the school year to 210 days or more. Districts may
apply to the Commissioner of Education for funds to be used in
planning and implementing an extended-school-year program.
(s) Determination of the basic amount for current
operation.—The basic amount for current operation to be included
in the Florida Education Finance Program for kindergarten
through grade 12 for each district shall be the product of the
following:
1. The full-time equivalent student membership in each
program, multiplied by
2. The cost factor for each program, adjusted for the
maximum as provided by paragraph (c), multiplied by
3. The base student allocation.
(t) Computation for funding through the Florida Education
Finance Program.—The State Board of Education may adopt rules
establishing programs, industry certifications, and courses for
which the student may earn credit toward high school graduation.
(2) DETERMINATION OF DISTRICT COST DIFFERENTIALS.—The
Commissioner of Education shall annually compute for each
district the current year’s district cost differential. The
district cost differential shall be calculated by adding each
district’s price level index as published in the Florida Price
Level Index for the most recent 3 years and dividing the
resulting sum by 3. The result for each district shall be
multiplied by 0.008 and to the resulting product shall be added
0.200; the sum thus obtained shall be the cost differential for
that district for that year.
(3) INSERVICE EDUCATIONAL PERSONNEL TRAINING EXPENDITURE.
Of the amount computed in subsections (1) and (2), a percentage
of the base student allocation per full-time equivalent student
or other funds shall be expended for educational training
programs as determined by the district school board as provided
in s. 1012.98.
(4) COMPUTATION OF DISTRICT REQUIRED LOCAL EFFORT.—The
Legislature shall prescribe the aggregate required local effort
for all school districts collectively as an item in the General
Appropriations Act for each fiscal year or in any law providing
funding for the Florida Education Finance Program for the 2017
2018 fiscal year. The amount that each district shall provide
annually toward the cost of the Florida Education Finance
Program for kindergarten through grade 12 programs shall be
calculated as follows:
(a) Estimated taxable value calculations.—
1.a. Not later than 2 working days before July 19, the
Department of Revenue shall certify to the Commissioner of
Education its most recent estimate of the taxable value for
school purposes in each school district and the total for all
school districts in the state for the current calendar year
based on the latest available data obtained from the local
property appraisers. The value certified shall be the taxable
value for school purposes for that year, and no further
adjustments shall be made, except those made pursuant to
paragraphs (c) and (d), or an assessment roll change required by
final judicial decisions as specified in paragraph (15)(b). Not
later than July 19, the Commissioner of Education shall compute
a millage rate, rounded to the next highest one one-thousandth
of a mill, which, when applied to 96 percent of the estimated
state total taxable value for school purposes, would generate
the prescribed aggregate required local effort for that year for
all districts. The Commissioner of Education shall certify to
each district school board the millage rate, computed as
prescribed in this subparagraph, as the minimum millage rate
necessary to provide the district required local effort for that
year.
b. The General Appropriations Act or any law providing
funding for the Florida Education Finance Program for the 2017
2018 fiscal year, shall direct the computation of the statewide
adjusted aggregate amount for required local effort for all
school districts collectively from ad valorem taxes to ensure
that no school district’s revenue from required local effort
millage will produce more than 90 percent of the district’s
total Florida Education Finance Program calculation as
calculated and adopted by the Legislature, and the adjustment of
the required local effort millage rate of each district that
produces more than 90 percent of its total Florida Education
Finance Program entitlement to a level that will produce only 90
percent of its total Florida Education Finance Program
entitlement in the July calculation.
2. On the same date as the certification in sub
subparagraph 1.a., the Department of Revenue shall certify to
the Commissioner of Education for each district:
a. Each year for which the property appraiser has certified
the taxable value pursuant to s. 193.122(2) or (3), if
applicable, since the prior certification under sub-subparagraph
1.a.
b. For each year identified in sub-subparagraph a., the
taxable value certified by the appraiser pursuant to s.
193.122(2) or (3), if applicable, since the prior certification
under sub-subparagraph 1.a. This is the certification that
reflects all final administrative actions of the value
adjustment board.
(b) Equalization of required local effort.—
1. The Department of Revenue shall include with its
certifications provided pursuant to paragraph (a) its most
recent determination of the assessment level of the prior year’s
assessment roll for each county and for the state as a whole.
2. The Commissioner of Education shall adjust the required
local effort millage of each district for the current year,
computed pursuant to paragraph (a), as follows:
a. The equalization factor for the prior year’s assessment
roll of each district shall be multiplied by 96 percent of the
taxable value for school purposes shown on that roll and by the
prior year’s required local-effort millage, exclusive of any
equalization adjustment made pursuant to this paragraph. The
dollar amount so computed shall be the additional required local
effort for equalization for the current year.
b. Such equalization factor shall be computed as the
quotient of the prior year’s assessment level of the state as a
whole divided by the prior year’s assessment level of the
county, from which quotient shall be subtracted 1.
c. The dollar amount of additional required local effort
for equalization for each district shall be converted to a
millage rate, based on 96 percent of the current year’s taxable
value for that district, and added to the required local effort
millage determined pursuant to paragraph (a).
3. Notwithstanding the limitations imposed pursuant to s.
1011.71(1), the total required local-effort millage, including
additional required local effort for equalization, shall be an
amount not to exceed 10 minus the maximum millage allowed as
nonvoted discretionary millage, exclusive of millage authorized
pursuant to s. 1011.71(2). Nothing herein shall be construed to
allow a millage in excess of that authorized in s. 9, Art. VII
of the State Constitution.
4. For the purposes of this chapter, the term “assessment
level” means the value-weighted mean assessment ratio for the
county or state as a whole, as determined pursuant to s.
195.096, or as subsequently adjusted. However, for those parcels
studied pursuant to s. 195.096(3)(a)1. which are receiving the
assessment limitation set forth in s. 193.155, and for which the
assessed value is less than the just value, the department shall
use the assessed value in the numerator and the denominator of
such assessment ratio. In the event a court has adjudicated that
the department failed to establish an accurate estimate of an
assessment level of a county and recomputation resulting in an
accurate estimate based upon the evidence before the court was
not possible, that county shall be presumed to have an
assessment level equal to that of the state as a whole.
5. If, in the prior year, taxes were levied against an
interim assessment roll pursuant to s. 193.1145, the assessment
level and prior year’s nonexempt assessed valuation used for the
purposes of this paragraph shall be those of the interim
assessment roll.
(c) Exclusion.—
1. In those instances in which:
a. There is litigation either attacking the authority of
the property appraiser to include certain property on the tax
assessment roll as taxable property or contesting the assessed
value of certain property on the tax assessment roll, and
b. The assessed value of the property in contest involves
more than 6 percent of the total nonexempt assessment roll, the
plaintiff shall provide to the district school board of the
county in which the property is located and to the Department of
Education a certified copy of the petition and receipt for the
good faith payment at the time they are filed with the court.
2. For purposes of computing the required local effort for
each district affected by such petition, the Department of
Education shall exclude from the district’s total nonexempt
assessment roll the assessed value of the property in contest
and shall add the amount of the good faith payment to the
district’s required local effort.
(d) Recomputation.—Following final adjudication of any
litigation on the basis of which an adjustment in taxable value
was made pursuant to paragraph (c), the department shall
recompute the required local effort for each district for each
year affected by such adjustments, utilizing taxable values
approved by the court, and shall adjust subsequent allocations
to such districts accordingly.
(e) Prior period funding adjustment millage.—
1. An additional millage to be known as the Prior Period
Funding Adjustment Millage shall be levied by a school district
if the prior period unrealized required local effort funds are
greater than zero. The Commissioner of Education shall calculate
the amount of the prior period unrealized required local effort
funds as specified in subparagraph 2. and the millage required
to generate that amount as specified in this subparagraph. The
Prior Period Funding Adjustment Millage shall be the quotient of
the prior period unrealized required local effort funds divided
by the current year taxable value certified to the Commissioner
of Education pursuant to sub-subparagraph (a)1.a. This levy
shall be in addition to the required local effort millage
certified pursuant to this subsection. Such millage shall not
affect the calculation of the current year’s required local
effort, and the funds generated by such levy shall not be
included in the district’s Florida Education Finance Program
allocation for that fiscal year. For purposes of the millage to
be included on the Notice of Proposed Taxes, the Commissioner of
Education shall adjust the required local effort millage
computed pursuant to paragraph (a) as adjusted by paragraph (b)
for the current year for any district that levies a Prior Period
Funding Adjustment Millage to include all Prior Period Funding
Adjustment Millage. For the purpose of this paragraph, a Prior
Period Funding Adjustment Millage shall be levied for each year
certified by the Department of Revenue pursuant to sub
subparagraph (a)2.a. since the previous year certification and
for which the calculation in sub-subparagraph 2.b. is greater
than zero.
2.a. As used in this subparagraph, the term:
(I) “Prior year” means a year certified under sub
subparagraph (a)2.a.
(II) “Preliminary taxable value” means:
(A) If the prior year is the 2009-2010 fiscal year or
later, the taxable value certified to the Commissioner of
Education pursuant to sub-subparagraph (a)1.a.
(B) If the prior year is the 2008-2009 fiscal year or
earlier, the taxable value certified pursuant to the final
calculation as specified in former paragraph (b) as that
paragraph existed in the prior year.
(III) “Final taxable value” means the district’s taxable
value as certified by the property appraiser pursuant to s.
193.122(2) or (3), if applicable. This is the certification that
reflects all final administrative actions of the value
adjustment board.
b. For purposes of this subsection and with respect to each
year certified pursuant to sub-subparagraph (a)2.a., if the
district’s prior year preliminary taxable value is greater than
the district’s prior year final taxable value, the prior period
unrealized required local effort funds are the difference
between the district’s prior year preliminary taxable value and
the district’s prior year final taxable value, multiplied by the
prior year district required local effort millage. If the
district’s prior year preliminary taxable value is less than the
district’s prior year final taxable value, the prior period
unrealized required local effort funds are zero.
c. If a district’s prior period unrealized required local
effort funds and prior period district required local effort
millage cannot be determined because such district’s final
taxable value has not yet been certified pursuant to s.
193.122(2) or (3), the Prior Period Funding Adjustment Millage
for such fiscal year shall be levied, if not previously levied,
in an amount equal to 75 percent of such district’s most recent
unrealized required local effort for which a Prior Period
Funding Adjustment Millage was determined as provided in this
section. Upon certification of the final taxable value in
accordance with s. 193.122(2) or (3) for a tax roll for which a
75 percent Prior Period Funding Adjustment Millage was levied,
the next Prior Period Funding Adjustment Millage shall be
adjusted to include any shortfall or surplus in the prior period
unrealized required local effort funds that would have been
levied, had the district’s final taxable value been certified
pursuant to s. 193.122(2) or (3). If this adjustment is made for
a surplus, the reduction in prior period millage may not exceed
the prior period funding adjustment millage calculated pursuant
to subparagraph 1. and sub-subparagraphs a. and b., or pursuant
to this sub-subparagraph, whichever is applicable, and any
additional reduction shall be carried forward to the subsequent
fiscal year.
(5) DISCRETIONARY MILLAGE COMPRESSION SUPPLEMENT.—The
Legislature shall prescribe in the General Appropriations Act,
pursuant to s. 1011.71(1), or in any law providing funding for
the Florida Education Finance Program for the 2017-2018 fiscal
year, the rate of nonvoted current operating discretionary
millage that shall be used to calculate a discretionary millage
compression supplement. If the prescribed millage generates an
amount of funds per unweighted FTE for the district that is less
than the state average, the district shall receive an amount per
FTE that, when added to the funds per FTE generated by the
designated levy, shall equal the state average.
(6) CATEGORICAL FUNDS.—
(a) In addition to the basic amount for current operations
for the FEFP as determined in subsection (1), the Legislature
may appropriate categorical funding for specified programs,
activities, or purposes.
(b) If a district school board finds and declares in a
resolution adopted at a regular meeting of the school board that
the funds received for any of the following categorical
appropriations are urgently needed to maintain school board
specified academic classroom instruction, the school board may
consider and approve an amendment to the school district
operating budget transferring the identified amount of the
categorical funds to the appropriate account for expenditure:
1. Funds for student transportation.
2. Funds for safe schools.
3. Funds for supplemental academic instruction if the
required additional hour of instruction beyond the normal school
day for each day of the entire school year has been provided for
the students in each low-performing elementary school in the
district pursuant to paragraph (1)(f).
4. Funds for research-based reading instruction if the
required additional hour of instruction beyond the normal school
day for each day of the entire school year has been provided for
the students in each low-performing elementary school in the
district pursuant to paragraph (9)(a).
5. Funds for instructional materials if all instructional
material purchases necessary to provide updated materials that
are aligned with applicable state standards and course
descriptions and that meet statutory requirements of content and
learning have been completed for that fiscal year, but no sooner
than March 1. Funds available after March 1 may be used to
purchase hardware for student instruction.
(c) Each district school board shall include in its annual
financial report to the Department of Education the amount of
funds the school board transferred from each of the categorical
funds identified in this subsection and the specific academic
classroom instruction for which the transferred funds were
expended. The Department of Education shall provide instructions
and specify the format to be used in submitting this required
information as a part of the district annual financial report.
The Department of Education shall submit a report to the
Legislature that identifies by district and by categorical fund
the amount transferred and the specific academic classroom
activity for which the funds were expended.
(d) If a district school board transfers funds from its
research-based reading instruction allocation, the board must
also submit to the Department of Education an amendment
describing the changes that the district is making to its
reading plan approved pursuant to paragraph (9)(d).
(7) DETERMINATION OF SPARSITY SUPPLEMENT.—
(a) Annually, in an amount to be determined by the
Legislature through the General Appropriations Act or through
any law providing funding for the Florida Education Finance
Program for the 2017-2018 fiscal year, there shall be added to
the basic amount for current operation of the FEFP qualified
districts a sparsity supplement which shall be computed as
follows:

Sparsity Factor =        1101.8918        -0.1101              
2700 + districtsparsityIndex
except that districts with a sparsity index of 1,000 or less
shall be computed as having a sparsity index of 1,000, and
districts having a sparsity index of 7,308 and above shall be
computed as having a sparsity factor of zero. A qualified
district’s full-time equivalent student membership shall equal
or be less than that prescribed annually by the Legislature in
the appropriations act or in any law providing funding for the
Florida Education Finance Program for the 2017-2018 fiscal year.
The amount prescribed annually by the Legislature shall be no
less than 17,000, but no more than 24,000.
(b) The district sparsity index shall be computed by
dividing the total number of full-time equivalent students in
all programs in the district by the number of senior high school
centers in the district, not in excess of three, which centers
are approved as permanent centers by a survey made by the
Department of Education.
(c) If the sparsity supplement calculated in paragraphs (a)
and (b) for an eligible district is less than $100 per full-time
equivalent student, the district’s supplement shall be increased
to $100 per FTE or to the minimum amount per FTE designated in
the General Appropriations Act or in any law providing funding
for the Florida Education Finance Program for the 2017-2018
fiscal year.
(d) Each district’s allocation of sparsity supplement funds
shall be adjusted in the following manner:
1. A maximum discretionary levy per FTE value for each
district shall be calculated by dividing the value of each
district’s maximum discretionary levy by its FTE student count.
2. A state average discretionary levy value per FTE shall
be calculated by dividing the total maximum discretionary levy
value for all districts by the state total FTE student count.
3. A total potential funds per FTE for each district shall
be calculated by dividing the total potential funds, not
including Florida School Recognition Program funds and the
minimum guarantee funds, for each district by its FTE student
count.
4. A state average total potential funds per FTE shall be
calculated by dividing the total potential funds, not including
Florida School Recognition Program funds and the minimum
guarantee funds, for all districts by the state total FTE
student count.
5. For districts that have a levy value per FTE as
calculated in subparagraph 1. higher than the state average
calculated in subparagraph 2., a sparsity wealth adjustment
shall be calculated as the product of the difference between the
state average levy value per FTE calculated in subparagraph 2.
and the district’s levy value per FTE calculated in subparagraph
1. and the district’s FTE student count and -1. However, no
district shall have a sparsity wealth adjustment that, when
applied to the total potential funds calculated in subparagraph
3., would cause the district’s total potential funds per FTE to
be less than the state average calculated in subparagraph 4.
6. Each district’s sparsity supplement allocation shall be
calculated by adding the amount calculated as specified in
paragraphs (a) and (b) and the wealth adjustment amount
calculated in this paragraph.
(8) DECLINE IN FULL-TIME EQUIVALENT STUDENTS.—In those
districts where there is a decline between prior year and
current year unweighted FTE students, a percentage of the
decline in the unweighted FTE students as determined by the
Legislature shall be multiplied by the prior year calculated
FEFP per unweighted FTE student and shall be added to the
allocation for that district. For this purpose, the calculated
FEFP shall be computed by multiplying the weighted FTE students
by the base student allocation and then by the district cost
differential. If a district transfers a program to another
institution not under the authority of the district’s school
board, including a charter technical career center, the decline
is to be multiplied by a factor of 0.15. However, if the funds
provided for the Florida Education Finance Program in the
General Appropriations Act for any fiscal year or in any law
providing funding for the Florida Education Finance Program for
the 2017-2018 fiscal year are reduced by a subsequent
appropriation for that fiscal year, the percent of the decline
in the unweighted FTE students to be funded shall be determined
by the Legislature and designated in the subsequent
appropriation.
(9) RESEARCH-BASED READING INSTRUCTION ALLOCATION.—
(a) The research-based reading instruction allocation is
created to provide comprehensive reading instruction to students
in kindergarten through grade 12. For the 2014-2015 fiscal year,
in each school district that has one or more of the 300 lowest
performing elementary schools based on the state reading
assessment, priority shall be given to providing an additional
hour per day of intensive reading instruction beyond the normal
school day for each day of the entire school year for the
students in each school. Students enrolled in these schools who
have level 5 assessment scores may participate in the additional
hour of instruction on an optional basis. Exceptional student
education centers shall not be included in the 300 schools. The
intensive reading instruction delivered in this additional hour
and for other students shall include: research-based reading
instruction that has been proven to accelerate progress of
students exhibiting a reading deficiency; differentiated
instruction based on student assessment data to meet students’
specific reading needs; explicit and systematic reading
development in phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary,
and comprehension, with more extensive opportunities for guided
practice, error correction, and feedback; and the integration of
social studies, science, and mathematics-text reading, text
discussion, and writing in response to reading. For the 2012
2013 and 2013-2014 fiscal years, a school district may not hire
more reading coaches than were hired during the 2011-2012 fiscal
year unless all students in kindergarten through grade 5 who
demonstrate a reading deficiency, as determined by district and
state assessments, including students scoring Level 1 or Level 2
on the statewide, standardized reading assessment or, upon
implementation, the English Language Arts assessment, are
provided an additional hour per day of intensive reading
instruction beyond the normal school day for each day of the
entire school year.
(b) Funds for comprehensive, research-based reading
instruction shall be allocated annually to each school district
in the amount provided in the General Appropriations Act or in
any law providing funding for the Florida Education Finance
Program for the 2017-2018 fiscal year. Each eligible school
district shall receive the same minimum amount as specified in
the General Appropriations Act or in any law providing funding
for the Florida Education Finance Program for the 2017-2018
fiscal year, and any remaining funds shall be distributed to
eligible school districts based on each school district’s
proportionate share of K-12 base funding.
(c) Funds allocated under this subsection must be used to
provide a system of comprehensive reading instruction to
students enrolled in the K-12 programs, which may include the
following:
1. The provision of an additional hour per day of intensive
reading instruction to students in the 300 lowest-performing
elementary schools by teachers and reading specialists who are
effective in teaching reading.
2. Kindergarten through grade 5 reading intervention
teachers to provide intensive intervention during the school day
and in the required extra hour for students identified as having
a reading deficiency.
3. The provision of highly qualified reading coaches to
specifically support teachers in making instructional decisions
based on student data, and improve teacher delivery of effective
reading instruction, intervention, and reading in the content
areas based on student need.
4. Professional development for school district teachers in
scientifically based reading instruction, including strategies
to teach reading in content areas and with an emphasis on
technical and informational text.
5. The provision of summer reading camps for all students
in kindergarten through grade 2 who demonstrate a reading
deficiency as determined by district and state assessments, and
students in grades 3 through 5 who score at Level 1 on the
statewide, standardized reading assessment or, upon
implementation, the English Language Arts assessment.
6. The provision of supplemental instructional materials
that are grounded in scientifically based reading research.
7. The provision of intensive interventions for students in
kindergarten through grade 12 who have been identified as having
a reading deficiency or who are reading below grade level as
determined by the statewide, standardized assessment.
(d) Annually, by a date determined by the Department of
Education but before May 1, school districts shall submit a K-12
comprehensive reading plan for the specific use of the research
based reading instruction allocation in the format prescribed by
the department for review and approval by the Just Read,
Florida! Office created pursuant to s. 1001.215. The plan
annually submitted by school districts shall be deemed approved
unless the department rejects the plan on or before June 1. If a
school district and the Just Read, Florida! Office cannot reach
agreement on the contents of the plan, the school district may
appeal to the State Board of Education for resolution. School
districts shall be allowed reasonable flexibility in designing
their plans and shall be encouraged to offer reading
intervention through innovative methods, including career
academies. The plan format shall be developed with input from
school district personnel, including teachers and principals,
and shall allow courses in core, career, and alternative
programs that deliver intensive reading remediation through
integrated curricula, provided that the teacher is deemed highly
qualified to teach reading or working toward that status. No
later than July 1 annually, the department shall release the
school district’s allocation of appropriated funds to those
districts having approved plans. A school district that spends
100 percent of this allocation on its approved plan shall be
deemed to have been in compliance with the plan. The department
may withhold funds upon a determination that reading instruction
allocation funds are not being used to implement the approved
plan. The department shall monitor and track the implementation
of each district plan, including conducting site visits and
collecting specific data on expenditures and reading improvement
results. By February 1 of each year, the department shall report
its findings to the Legislature.
(10) CALCULATION OF SUPPLEMENTAL ALLOCATION FOR JUVENILE
JUSTICE EDUCATION PROGRAMS.—The total K-12 weighted full-time
equivalent student membership in juvenile justice education
programs in each school district shall be multiplied by the
amount of the state average class-size-reduction factor
multiplied by the district’s cost differential. An amount equal
to the sum of this calculation shall be allocated in the FEFP to
each school district to supplement other sources of funding for
students in juvenile justice education programs.
(11) VIRTUAL EDUCATION CONTRIBUTION.—The Legislature may
annually provide in the Florida Education Finance Program a
virtual education contribution. The amount of the virtual
education contribution shall be the difference between the
amount per FTE established in the General Appropriations Act or
in any law providing funding for the Florida Education Finance
Program for the 2017-2018 fiscal year for virtual education and
the amount per FTE for each district and the Florida Virtual
School, which may be calculated by taking the sum of the base
FEFP allocation, the discretionary local effort, the state
funded discretionary contribution, the discretionary millage
compression supplement, the research-based reading instruction
allocation, and the instructional materials allocation, and then
dividing by the total unweighted FTE. This difference shall be
multiplied by the virtual education unweighted FTE for programs
and options identified in s. 1002.455(3) and the Florida Virtual
School and its franchises to equal the virtual education
contribution and shall be included as a separate allocation in
the funding formula.
(12) FLORIDA DIGITAL CLASSROOMS ALLOCATION.—
(a) The Florida digital classrooms allocation is created to
support school district and school efforts and strategies to
improve outcomes related to student performance by integrating
technology in classroom teaching and learning. The outcomes must
be measurable and may also be unique to the needs of individual
schools and school districts within the general parameters
established by the Department of Education.
(b) Each district school board shall adopt a district
digital classrooms plan that meets the unique needs of students,
schools, and personnel and submit the plan for approval to the
Department of Education. In addition, each district school board
must, at a minimum, seek input from the district’s
instructional, curriculum, and information technology staff to
develop the district digital classrooms plan. The district’s
plan must be within the general parameters established in the
Florida digital classrooms plan pursuant to s. 1001.20. In
addition, if the district participates in federal technology
initiatives and grant programs, the district digital classrooms
plan must include a plan for meeting requirements of such
initiatives and grant programs. Funds allocated under this
subsection must be used to support implementation of district
digital classrooms plans. By October 1, 2014, and by March 1 of
each year thereafter, on a date determined by the department,
each district school board shall submit to the department, in a
format prescribed by the department, a digital classrooms plan.
At a minimum, such plan must include, and be annually updated to
reflect, the following:
1. Measurable student performance outcomes. Outcomes
related to student performance, including outcomes for students
with disabilities, must be tied to the efforts and strategies to
improve outcomes related to student performance by integrating
technology in classroom teaching and learning. Results of the
outcomes shall be reported at least annually for the current
school year and subsequent 3 years and be accompanied by an
independent evaluation and validation of the reported results.
2. Digital learning and technology infrastructure purchases
and operational activities. Such purchases and activities must
be tied to the measurable outcomes under subparagraph 1.,
including, but not limited to, connectivity, broadband access,
wireless capacity, Internet speed, and data security, all of
which must meet or exceed minimum requirements and protocols
established by the department. For each year that the district
uses funds for infrastructure, a third-party, independent
evaluation of the district’s technology inventory and
infrastructure needs must accompany the district’s plan.
3. Professional development purchases and operational
activities. Such purchases and activities must be tied to the
measurable outcomes under subparagraph 1., including, but not
limited to, using technology in the classroom and improving
digital literacy and competency.
4. Digital tool purchases and operational activities. Such
purchases and activities must be tied to the measurable outcomes
under subparagraph 1., including, but not limited to,
competency-based credentials that measure and demonstrate
digital competency and certifications; third-party assessments
that demonstrate acquired knowledge and use of digital
applications; and devices that meet or exceed minimum
requirements and protocols established by the department.
5. Online assessment-related purchases and operational
activities. Such purchases and activities must be tied to the
measurable outcomes under subparagraph 1., including, but not
limited to, expanding the capacity to administer assessments and
compatibility with minimum assessment protocols and requirements
established by the department.
(c) The Legislature shall annually provide in the General
Appropriations Act or in any law providing funding for the
Florida Education Finance Program for the 2017-2018 fiscal year
the FEFP allocation for implementation of the Florida digital
classrooms plan to be calculated in an amount up to 1 percent of
the base student allocation multiplied by the total K-12 full
time equivalent student enrollment included in the FEFP
calculations for the legislative appropriation or as provided in
the General Appropriations Act or in any law providing funding
for the Florida Education Finance Program for the 2017-2018
fiscal year. Each school district shall be provided a minimum of
$250,000, with the remaining balance of the allocation to be
distributed based on each district’s proportion of the total K
12 full-time equivalent student enrollment. Distribution of
funds for the Florida digital classrooms allocation shall begin
following submittal of each district’s digital classrooms plan,
which must include formal verification of the superintendent’s
approval of the digital classrooms plan of each charter school
in the district, and approval of the plan by the department.
Prior to the distribution of the Florida digital classrooms
allocation funds, each district school superintendent shall
certify to the Commissioner of Education that the district
school board has approved a comprehensive district digital
classrooms plan that supports the fidelity of implementation of
the Florida digital classrooms allocation. District allocations
shall be recalculated during the fiscal year consistent with the
periodic recalculation of the FEFP. School districts shall
provide a proportionate share of the digital classrooms
allocation to each charter school in the district, as required
for categorical programs in s. 1002.33(17)(b). A school district
may use a competitive process to distribute funds for the
Florida digital classrooms allocation to the schools within the
school district.
(d) To facilitate the implementation of the district
digital classrooms plans and charter school digital classrooms
plans, the commissioner shall support statewide, coordinated
partnerships and efforts of this state’s education practitioners
in the field, including, but not limited to, superintendents,
principals, and teachers, to identify and share best practices,
corrective actions, and other identified needs.
(e) Beginning in the 2015-2016 fiscal year and each year
thereafter, each district school board shall report to the
department its use of funds provided through the Florida digital
classrooms allocation and student performance outcomes in
accordance with the district’s digital classrooms plan. The
department may contract with an independent third-party entity
to conduct an annual independent verification of the district’s
use of Florida digital classrooms allocation funds in accordance
with the district’s digital classrooms plan. In the event an
independent third-party verification is not conducted, the
Auditor General shall, during scheduled operational audits of
the school districts, verify compliance of the use of Florida
digital classrooms allocation funds in accordance with the
district’s digital classrooms plan. No later than October 1 of
each year, beginning in the 2015-2016 fiscal year, the
commissioner shall provide to the Governor, the President of the
Senate, and the Speaker of the House of Representatives a
summary of each district’s use of funds, student performance
outcomes, and progress toward meeting statutory requirements and
timelines.
(f) Each school district shall provide teachers,
administrators, students, and parents with access to:
1. Instructional materials in digital or electronic format,
as defined in s. 1006.29.
2. Digital materials, including those digital materials
that enable students to earn certificates and industry
certifications pursuant to ss. 1003.4203 and 1008.44.
3. Teaching and learning tools and resources, including the
ability for teachers and administrators to manage, assess, and
monitor student performance data.
(13) FEDERALLY CONNECTED STUDENT SUPPLEMENT.—The federally
connected student supplement is created to provide supplemental
funding for school districts to support the education of
students connected with federally owned military installations,
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) real
property, and Indian lands. To be eligible for this supplement,
the district must be eligible for federal Impact Aid Program
funds under s. 8003 of Title VIII of the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act of 1965. The supplement shall be
allocated annually to each eligible school district in the
amount provided in the General Appropriations Act or in any law
providing funding for the Florida Education Finance Program for
the 2017-2018 fiscal year. The supplement shall be the sum of
the student allocation and an exempt property allocation.
(a) The student allocation shall be calculated based on the
number of students reported for federal Impact Aid Program
funds, including students with disabilities, who meet one of the
following criteria:
1. The student has a parent who is on active duty in the
uniformed services or is an accredited foreign government
official and military officer. Students with disabilities shall
also be reported separately for this category.
2. The student resides on eligible federally owned Indian
land. Students with disabilities shall also be reported
separately for this category.
3. The student resides with a civilian parent who lives or
works on eligible federal property connected with a military
installation or NASA. The number of these students shall be
multiplied by a factor of 0.5.
(b) The total number of federally connected students
calculated under paragraph (a) shall be multiplied by a
percentage of the base student allocation as provided in the
General Appropriations Act or in any law providing funding for
the Florida Education Finance Program for the 2017-2018 fiscal
year. The total of the number of students with disabilities as
reported separately under subparagraphs (a)1. and 2. shall be
multiplied by an additional percentage of the base student
allocation as provided in the General Appropriations Act or in
any law providing funding for the Florida Education Finance
Program for the 2017-2018 fiscal year. The base amount and the
amount for students with disabilities shall be summed to provide
the student allocation.
(c) The exempt property allocation shall be equal to the
tax-exempt value of federal impact aid lands reserved as
military installations, real property owned by NASA, or eligible
federally owned Indian lands located in the district, as of
January 1 of the previous year, multiplied by the millage
authorized and levied under s. 1011.71(2).
(14) QUALITY ASSURANCE GUARANTEE.—The Legislature may
annually in the General Appropriations Act or in any law
providing funding for the Florida Education Finance Program for
the 2017-2018 fiscal year determine a percentage increase in
funds per K-12 unweighted FTE as a minimum guarantee to each
school district. The guarantee shall be calculated from prior
year base funding per unweighted FTE student which shall include
the adjusted FTE dollars as provided in subsection (15), quality
guarantee funds, and actual nonvoted discretionary local effort
from taxes. From the base funding per unweighted FTE, the
increase shall be calculated for the current year. The current
year funds from which the guarantee shall be determined shall
include the adjusted FTE dollars as provided in subsection (15)
and potential nonvoted discretionary local effort from taxes. A
comparison of current year funds per unweighted FTE to prior
year funds per unweighted FTE shall be computed. For those
school districts which have less than the legislatively assigned
percentage increase, funds shall be provided to guarantee the
assigned percentage increase in funds per unweighted FTE
student. Should appropriated funds be less than the sum of this
calculated amount for all districts, the commissioner shall
prorate each district’s allocation. This provision shall be
implemented to the extent specifically funded.
(15) TOTAL ALLOCATION OF STATE FUNDS TO EACH DISTRICT FOR
CURRENT OPERATION.—The total annual state allocation to each
district for current operation for the FEFP shall be distributed
periodically in the manner prescribed in the General
Appropriations Act or in any law providing funding for the
Florida Education Finance Program for the 2017-2018 fiscal year.
(a) If the funds appropriated for current operation of the
FEFP are not sufficient to pay the state requirement in full,
the department shall prorate the available state funds to each
district in the following manner:
1. Determine the percentage of proration by dividing the
sum of the total amount for current operation, as provided in
this paragraph for all districts collectively, and the total
district required local effort into the sum of the state funds
available for current operation and the total district required
local effort.
2. Multiply the percentage so determined by the sum of the
total amount for current operation as provided in this paragraph
and the required local effort for each individual district.
3. From the product of such multiplication, subtract the
required local effort of each district; and the remainder shall
be the amount of state funds allocated to the district for
current operation. However, no calculation subsequent to the
appropriation shall result in negative state funds for any
district.
(b) The amount thus obtained shall be the net annual
allocation to each school district. However, if it is determined
that any school district received an underallocation or
overallocation for any prior year because of an arithmetical
error, assessment roll change required by final judicial
decision, full-time equivalent student membership error, or any
allocation error revealed in an audit report, the allocation to
that district shall be appropriately adjusted. Beginning with
the 2011-2012 fiscal year, if a special program cost factor is
less than the basic program cost factor, an audit adjustment may
not result in the reclassification of the special program FTE to
the basic program FTE. If the Department of Education audit
adjustment recommendation is based upon controverted findings of
fact, the Commissioner of Education is authorized to establish
the amount of the adjustment based on the best interests of the
state.
(c) The amount thus obtained shall represent the net annual
state allocation to each district; however, notwithstanding any
of the provisions herein, each district shall be guaranteed a
minimum level of funding in the amount and manner prescribed in
the General Appropriations Act or in any law providing funding
for the Florida Education Finance Program for the 2017-2018
fiscal year.
(16) COMPUTATION OF PRIOR YEAR DISTRICT REQUIRED LOCAL
EFFORT.—Calculations required in this section shall be based on
95 percent of the taxable value for school purposes for fiscal
years prior to the 2010-2011 fiscal year.
Section 3. Paragraphs (a) and (b) of subsection (1) of
section 1011.67, Florida Statutes, are amended to read:
1011.67 Funds for instructional materials.—
(1) The department is authorized to allocate and distribute
to each district an amount as prescribed annually by the
Legislature for instructional materials for student membership
in basic and special programs in grades K-12, which will provide
for growth and maintenance needs. For purposes of this
subsection, unweighted full-time equivalent students enrolled in
the lab schools in state universities are to be included as
school district students and reported as such to the department.
The annual allocation shall be determined as follows:
(a) The growth allocation for each school district shall be
calculated as follows:
1. Subtract from that district’s projected full-time
equivalent membership of students in basic and special programs
in grades K-12 used in determining the initial allocation of the
Florida Education Finance Program, the prior year’s full-time
equivalent membership of students in basic and special programs
in grades K-12 for that district.
2. Multiply any such increase in full-time equivalent
student membership by the allocation for a set of instructional
materials, as determined by the department, or as provided for
in the General Appropriations Act or in any law providing
funding for the Florida Education Finance Program for the 2017
2018 fiscal year.
3. The amount thus determined shall be that district’s
initial allocation for growth for the school year. However, the
department shall recompute and adjust the initial allocation
based on actual full-time equivalent student membership data for
that year.
(b) The maintenance of the instructional materials
allocation for each school district shall be calculated by
multiplying each district’s prior year full-time equivalent
membership of students in basic and special programs in grades
K-12 by the allocation for maintenance of a set of instructional
materials as provided for in the General Appropriations Act or
in any law providing funding for the Florida Education Finance
Program for the 2017-2018 fiscal year. The amount thus
determined shall be that district’s initial allocation for
maintenance for the school year; however, the department shall
recompute and adjust the initial allocation based on such actual
full-time equivalent student membership data for that year.
Section 4. Subsection (1) of section 1011.685, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
1011.685 Class size reduction; operating categorical fund.—
(1) There is created an operating categorical fund for
implementing the class size reduction provisions of s. 1, Art.
IX of the State Constitution. These funds shall be allocated to
each school district in the amount prescribed by the Legislature
in the General Appropriations Act or in any law providing
funding for the Florida Education Finance Program for the 2017
2018 fiscal year.
Section 5. Subsections (1), (3), and (9) of section
1011.71, Florida Statutes, are amended to read:
1011.71 District school tax.—
(1) If the district school tax is not provided in the
General Appropriations Act or the substantive bill implementing
the General Appropriations Act or in any law providing funding
for the Florida Education Finance Program for the 2017-2018
fiscal year, each district school board desiring to participate
in the state allocation of funds for current operation as
prescribed by s. 1011.62(15) shall levy on the taxable value for
school purposes of the district, exclusive of millage voted
under s. 9(b) or s. 12, Art. VII of the State Constitution, a
millage rate not to exceed the amount certified by the
commissioner as the minimum millage rate necessary to provide
the district required local effort for the current year,
pursuant to s. 1011.62(4)(a)1. In addition to the required local
effort millage levy, each district school board may levy a
nonvoted current operating discretionary millage. The
Legislature shall prescribe annually in the appropriations act
the maximum amount of millage a district may levy.
(3) Notwithstanding subsection (2), if the revenue from 1.5
mills is insufficient to meet the payments due under a lease
purchase agreement entered into before June 30, 2009, by a
district school board pursuant to paragraph (2)(e), or to meet
other critical district fixed capital outlay needs, the board,
in addition to the 1.5 mills, may levy up to 0.25 mills for
fixed capital outlay in lieu of levying an equivalent amount of
the discretionary mills for operations as provided in the
General Appropriations Act or in any law providing funding for
the Florida Education Finance Program for the 2017-2018 fiscal
year. Millage levied pursuant to this subsection is subject to
the provisions of s. 200.065 and, combined with the 1.5 mills
authorized in subsection (2), may not exceed 1.75 mills. If the
district chooses to use up to 0.25 mills for fixed capital
outlay, the compression adjustment pursuant to s. 1011.62(5)
shall be calculated for the standard discretionary millage that
is not eligible for transfer to capital outlay.
(9) In addition to the maximum millage levied under this
section and the General Appropriations Act or in any law
providing funding for the Florida Education Finance Program for
the 2017-2018 fiscal year, a school district may levy, by local
referendum or in a general election, additional millage for
school operational purposes up to an amount that, when combined
with nonvoted millage levied under this section, does not exceed
the 10-mill limit established in s. 9(b), Art. VII of the State
Constitution. Any such levy shall be for a maximum of 4 years
and shall be counted as part of the 10-mill limit established in
s. 9(b), Art. VII of the State Constitution. Millage elections
conducted under the authority granted pursuant to this section
are subject to s. 1011.73. Funds generated by such additional
millage do not become a part of the calculation of the Florida
Education Finance Program total potential funds in 2001-2002 or
any subsequent year and must not be incorporated in the
calculation of any hold-harmless or other component of the
Florida Education Finance Program formula in any year. If an
increase in required local effort, when added to existing
millage levied under the 10-mill limit, would result in a
combined millage in excess of the 10-mill limit, any millage
levied pursuant to this subsection shall be considered to be
required local effort to the extent that the district millage
would otherwise exceed the 10-mill limit.
Section 6. Subsection (2) of section 1012.71, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
1012.71 The Florida Teachers Classroom Supply Assistance
Program.—
(2) The Legislature, in the General Appropriations Act or
in any law providing funding for the Florida Education Finance
Program for the 2017-2018 fiscal year, shall determine funding
for the Florida Teachers Classroom Supply Assistance Program.
The funds appropriated are for classroom teachers to purchase,
on behalf of the school district or charter school, classroom
materials and supplies for the public school students assigned
to them and may not be used to purchase equipment. The funds
appropriated shall be used to supplement the materials and
supplies otherwise available to classroom teachers. From the
funds appropriated for the Florida Teachers Classroom Supply
Assistance Program, the Commissioner of Education shall
calculate an amount for each school district based upon each
school district’s proportionate share of the state’s total
unweighted FTE student enrollment and shall disburse the funds
to the school districts by July 15.
Section 7. If any law amended by this act was also amended
by a law enacted during the 2017 Regular Session of the
Legislature, such laws shall be construed as if enacted during
the same session of the Legislature, and full effect shall be
given to each if possible.
Section 8. This act shall take effect July 1, 2017; or, if
this act fails to become a law until after that date, it shall
take effect upon becoming a law and shall operate retroactively
to July 1, 2017.