A bill to be entitled                      
An act relating to K-12 education; amending s.
1001.42, F.S.; revising provisions relating to school
improvement plans; requiring only specified schools to
submit a school improvement plan; deleting a
requirement that certain information be included in
the improvement plans of certain schools; revising the
grade levels required to implement an early warning
system; revising the required content of an early
warning system; requiring a specified team to monitor
specified data; revising what constitutes an
educational emergency and establishing duties of
district school boards relating to such emergency;
amending s. 1002.33, F.S.; revising the criteria a
charter school must meet to require corrective action;
revising requirements for corrective action by charter
schools; revising criteria for waiver of automatic
charter termination; revising the purpose of charter
school cooperatives; authorizing the use of
unrestricted net assets and unrestricted surplus for
specified charter schools; requiring such funds to be
used in accordance with specified provisions; amending
s. 1002.332, F.S.; conforming a cross-reference;
amending s. 1008.33, F.S.; providing that intervention
and support services apply consistently to any school
meeting specified criteria; revising the required
timeline for the implementation of a district-managed
turnaround plan; providing turnaround options
available to school districts meeting specified
criteria; amending s. 1008.345, F.S.; revising the
criteria a school must meet to have a community
assessment team; revising the duties of a community
assessment team; amending s. 1011.62, F.S.; revising
the requirements for an independent college or
university to participate in specified programs;
creating s. 1012.732, F.S.; creating the Florida Best
and Brightest Teacher and Principal Scholar Award
Program to be administered by the Department of
Education; providing the intent and purpose of the
program; providing eligibility requirements for
classroom teachers and school administrators to
participate in the program; providing timelines and
requirements for program implementation; providing
funding priorities; defining the term “school
district”; requiring the State Board of Education to
adopt rules; providing for construction of the act in
pari materia with laws enacted during the 2017 Regular
Session of the Legislature; providing an effective
date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:

Section 1. Paragraphs (a) and (b) of subsection (18) and
subsection (21) of section 1001.42, Florida Statutes, are
amended to read:
1001.42 Powers and duties of district school board.—The
district school board, acting as a board, shall exercise all
powers and perform all duties listed below:
(18) IMPLEMENT SCHOOL IMPROVEMENT AND ACCOUNTABILITY.
Maintain a system of school improvement and education
accountability as provided by statute and State Board of
Education rule. This system of school improvement and education
accountability shall be consistent with, and implemented
through, the district’s continuing system of planning and
budgeting required by this section and ss. 1008.385, 1010.01,
and 1011.01. This system of school improvement and education
accountability shall comply with the provisions of ss. 1008.33,
1008.34, 1008.345, and 1008.385 and include the following:
(a) School improvement plans.—
1. The district school board shall annually approve and
require implementation of a new, amended, or continuation school
improvement plan for each school in the district which has a
school grade of “D” or “F”;. If a school has a significant gap
in achievement on statewide, standardized assessments
administered pursuant to s. 1008.22 by one or more student
subgroups, as defined in the federal Elementary and Secondary
Education Act (ESEA), 20 U.S.C. s. 6311(b)(2)(C)(v)(II); has not
significantly increased the percentage of students passing
statewide, standardized assessments; has not significantly
increased the percentage of students demonstrating Learning
Gains, as defined in s. 1008.34 and as calculated under s.
1008.34(3)(b), who passed statewide, standardized assessments;
or has significantly lower graduation rates for a subgroup when
compared to the state’s graduation rate. The, that school’s
improvement plan of a school that meets the requirements of this
paragraph shall include strategies for improving these results.
The state board shall adopt rules establishing thresholds and
for determining compliance with this paragraph subparagraph.
2. A school that includes any of grades 6, 7, or 8 shall
include annually in its school improvement plan information and
data on the school’s early warning system required under
paragraph (b), including a list of the early warning indicators
used in the system, the number of students identified by the
system as exhibiting two or more early warning indicators, the
number of students by grade level that exhibit each early
warning indicator, and a description of all intervention
strategies employed by the school to improve the academic
performance of students identified by the early warning system.
In addition, a school that includes any of grades 6, 7, or 8
shall describe in its school improvement plan the strategies
used by the school to implement the instructional practices for
middle grades emphasized by the district’s professional
development system pursuant to s. 1012.98(4)(b)9.
(b) Early warning system.—
1. A school that serves any students in grade 1 through
grade includes any of grades 6, 7, or 8 shall implement an early
warning system to identify students in such grades 6, 7, and 8
who need additional support to improve academic performance and
stay engaged in school. The early warning system must include
the following early warning indicators:
a. Attendance below 90 percent, regardless of whether
absence is excused or a result of out-of-school suspension.
b. One or more suspensions, whether in school or out of
school.
c. Course failure in English Language Arts or mathematics
during any grading period.
d. A Level 1 score on the statewide, standardized
assessments in English Language Arts or mathematics or, for
students in grade 1 through grade 3, a substantial deficiency in
reading under s. 1008.25(5)(a).

A school district may identify additional early warning
indicators for use in a school’s early warning system. Beginning
in the 2018-2019 academic year, the system must include data on
the number of students identified by the system as exhibiting
two or more early warning indicators, the number of students by
grade level who exhibit each early warning indicator, and a
description of all intervention strategies employed by the
school to improve the academic performance of students
identified by the early warning system.
2. When a student exhibits two or more early warning
indicators, the school’s child study team under s. 1003.02 or a
school-based team formed for the purpose of implementing the
requirements of this paragraph, in consultation with the
student’s parent, shall convene to determine appropriate
intervention strategies for the student. The team must use data
and information relating to a student’s early warning indicators
to inform any intervention strategies provided to the student.
The school shall provide at least 10 days’ written notice of the
meeting to the student’s parent, indicating the meeting’s
purpose, time, and location, and provide the parent the
opportunity to participate.
(21) EDUCATIONAL AUTHORITY TO DECLARE AN EMERGENCY.—Pursue
negotiations of May declare an emergency in cases in which one
or more schools in the district are failing or are in danger of
failing and negotiate special provisions of its contract with
the appropriate bargaining units to free these schools meeting
specified conditions from contract restrictions that limit a the
school’s ability to implement programs and strategies needed to
improve student performance. The negotiations must result in a
memorandum of understanding that addresses the selection,
placement, and expectations of instructional personnel and
school administrators. For purposes of this subsection, an
educational emergency exists in a school district under the
following conditions, and the school board must act accordingly:
(a) A school board may negotiate in cases in which one or
more schools in the district have a school grade of “D” or in
which a school is in danger of earning a grade of “F.”
(b) Beginning in the 2018-2019 academic year, a school
board may negotiate in cases in which one or more schools in the
district are currently subject to, or are in danger of being
subject to, a differentiated matrix of intervention and support
strategies as a turnaround school or turnaround schools under s.
1008.33(3)(c).
Section 2. Paragraph (n) of subsection (9), subsection
(13), and paragraph (b) of subsection (17) of section 1002.33,
Florida Statutes, are amended to read:
1002.33 Charter schools.—
(9) CHARTER SCHOOL REQUIREMENTS.—
(n)1. The director and a representative of the governing
board of a charter school that has earned a grade of “D” or is
in danger of earning a grade of “F” pursuant to s. 1008.34 shall
appear before the sponsor to present information concerning each
contract component having noted deficiencies. The director and a
representative of the governing board shall submit to the
sponsor for approval a school improvement plan to raise student
performance. Upon approval by the sponsor, the charter school
shall begin implementation of the school improvement plan. The
department shall offer technical assistance and training to the
charter school and its governing board and establish guidelines
for developing, submitting, and approving such plans.
2.a. If a charter school earns a grade of “F” or two three
consecutive grades below a “C,” of “D,” two consecutive grades
of “D” followed by a grade of “F,” or two nonconsecutive grades
of “F” within a 3-year period, the turnaround charter school
governing board must immediately implement its approved school
improvement plan for the remainder of the school year and
continue implementation for at least 1 school year, and shall
choose one of the following corrective actions:
(I) Contract for educational services to be provided
directly to students, instructional personnel, and school
administrators, as prescribed in state board rule;
(II) Contract with an outside entity that has a
demonstrated record of effectiveness to operate the school;
(III) Reorganize the school under a new director or
principal who is authorized to hire new staff; or
(IV) Voluntarily close the charter school.
b. The turnaround charter school must implement the
corrective action in the school year following receipt of a
grade of “F” or a second third consecutive grade below a “C.” of
“D,” a grade of “F” following two consecutive grades of “D,” or
a second nonconsecutive grade of “F” within a 3-year period.
c. The sponsor may annually waive a corrective action if it
determines that the turnaround charter school is likely to
improve a letter grade if additional time is provided to
implement the intervention and support strategies prescribed by
the school improvement plan. Notwithstanding this sub
subparagraph, a charter school that earns a second consecutive
grade of “F” is subject to subparagraph 3. 4.
d. A turnaround charter school is no longer required to
implement a corrective action if it improves to a grade of “C”
or higher by at least one letter grade. However, the charter
school must continue to implement strategies identified in the
school improvement plan. The sponsor must annually review
implementation of the school improvement plan to monitor the
school’s continued improvement pursuant to subparagraph 4. 5.
e. A turnaround charter school implementing a corrective
action that does not improve to a grade of “C” or higher by at
least one letter grade after 2 full school years of implementing
the corrective action must select a different corrective action.
Implementation of the new corrective action must begin in the
school year following the implementation period of the existing
corrective action, unless the sponsor determines that the
charter school is likely to improve to a grade of “C” or higher
a letter grade if additional time is provided to implement the
existing corrective action. Notwithstanding this sub
subparagraph, a charter school that earns a second consecutive
grade of “F” while implementing a corrective action is subject
to subparagraph 3. 4.
3. A charter school with a grade of “D” or “F” that
improves by at least one letter grade must continue to implement
the strategies identified in the school improvement plan. The
sponsor must annually review implementation of the school
improvement plan to monitor the school’s continued improvement
pursuant to subparagraph 5.
3.4. A charter school’s charter contract is automatically
terminated if the school earns two consecutive grades of “F”
after all school grade appeals are final unless:
a. The charter school is established to turn around the
performance of a district public school pursuant to s.
1008.33(4)(b)6. s. 1008.33(4)(b)3. Such charter schools shall be
governed by s. 1008.33;
b. The charter school serves a student population the
majority of which resides in a school zone served by a district
public school subject to s. 1008.33(4) that earned a grade of
“F” in the year before the charter school opened and the charter
school earns at least a grade of “D” in its third year of
operation. The exception provided under this sub-subparagraph
does not apply to a charter school in its fourth year of
operation and thereafter; or
c. The state board grants the charter school a waiver of
termination. The charter school must request the waiver within
15 days after the department’s official release of school
grades. The state board may waive termination if the charter
school demonstrates that the Learning Gains of its students on
statewide assessments are comparable to or better than the
Learning Gains of similarly situated students enrolled in nearby
district public schools. The waiver is valid for 1 year and may
only be granted once. Charter schools that have been in
operation for more than 5 years are not eligible for a waiver
under this sub-subparagraph.

The sponsor shall notify the charter school’s governing board,
the charter school principal, and the department in writing when
a charter contract is terminated under this subparagraph. The
letter of termination must meet the requirements of paragraph
(8)(c). A charter terminated under this subparagraph must follow
the procedures for dissolution and reversion of public funds
pursuant to paragraphs (8)(e)-(g) and (9)(o).
4.5. The director and a representative of the governing
board of a graded charter school that has implemented a school
improvement plan under this paragraph shall appear before the
sponsor at least once a year to present information regarding
the progress of intervention and support strategies implemented
by the school pursuant to the school improvement plan and
corrective actions, if applicable. The sponsor shall communicate
at the meeting, and in writing to the director, the services
provided to the school to help the school address its
deficiencies.
5.6. Notwithstanding any provision of this paragraph except
sub-subparagraphs 3.a.-c. 4.a.-c., the sponsor may terminate the
charter at any time pursuant to subsection (8).
(13) CHARTER SCHOOL COOPERATIVES.—Charter schools may enter
into cooperative agreements to form charter school cooperative
organizations that may provide the following services to further
educational, operational, and administrative initiatives in
which the participating charter schools share common interests:
charter school planning and development, direct instructional
services, and contracts with charter school governing boards to
provide personnel administrative services, payroll services,
human resource management, evaluation and assessment services,
teacher preparation, and professional development.
(17) FUNDING.—Students enrolled in a charter school,
regardless of the sponsorship, shall be funded as if they are in
a basic program or a special program, the same as students
enrolled in other public schools in the school district. Funding
for a charter lab school shall be as provided in s. 1002.32.
(b) The basis for the agreement for funding students
enrolled in a charter school shall be the sum of the school
district’s operating funds from the Florida Education Finance
Program as provided in s. 1011.62 and the General Appropriations
Act, including gross state and local funds, discretionary
lottery funds, and funds from the school district’s current
operating discretionary millage levy; divided by total funded
weighted full-time equivalent students in the school district;
multiplied by the weighted full-time equivalent students for the
charter school. Charter schools whose students or programs meet
the eligibility criteria in law are entitled to their
proportionate share of categorical program funds included in the
total funds available in the Florida Education Finance Program
by the Legislature, including transportation, the research-based
reading allocation, and the Florida digital classrooms
allocation. Total funding for each charter school shall be
recalculated during the year to reflect the revised calculations
under the Florida Education Finance Program by the state and the
actual weighted full-time equivalent students reported by the
charter school during the full-time equivalent student survey
periods designated by the Commissioner of Education. For charter
schools operated by a not-for-profit or municipal entity, any
unrestricted surplus or unrestricted net assets identified in
the charter school’s annual audit may be used for K-12
educational purposes for other charter schools in the state
operated by the same not-for-profit or municipal entity. Surplus
operating funds shall be used in accordance with s. 1011.62, and
surplus capital outlay funds shall be used in accordance with s.
1013.62(2).
Section 3. Paragraph (b) of subsection (1) of section
1002.332, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
1002.332 High-performing charter school system.—
(1) For purposes of this section, the term:
(b) “High-performing charter school system” means an entity
that:
1. Operated at least three high-performing charter schools
in the state during each of the previous 3 school years;
2. Operated a system of charter schools in which at least
50 percent of the charter schools were high-performing charter
schools pursuant to s. 1002.331 and no charter school earned a
school grade of “D” or “F” pursuant to s. 1008.34 in any of the
previous 3 school years regardless of whether the entity
currently operates the charter school, except that:
a. If the entity assumed operation of a public school
pursuant to s. 1008.33(4)(b)6. s. 1008.33(4)(b)3. with a school
grade of “F,” that school’s grade may not be considered in
determining high-performing charter school system status for a
period of 3 years.
b. If the entity established a new charter school that
served a student population the majority of which resided in a
school zone served by a public school that earned a grade of “F”
or three consecutive grades of “D” pursuant to s. 1008.34, that
charter school’s grade may not be considered in determining
high-performing charter school system status if it attained and
maintained a school grade that was higher than that of the
public school serving that school zone within 3 years after
establishment; and
3. Did not receive a financial audit that revealed one or
more of the financial emergency conditions set forth in s.
218.503(1) for any charter school assumed or established by the
entity in the most recent 3 fiscal years for which such audits
are available.
Section 4. Subsections (3), (4), and (5) of section
1008.33, Florida Statutes, are amended to read:
1008.33 Authority to enforce public school improvement.—
(3)(a) The academic performance of all students has a
significant effect on the state school system. Pursuant to Art.
IX of the State Constitution, which prescribes the duty of the
State Board of Education to supervise Florida’s public school
system, the state board shall equitably enforce the
accountability requirements of the state school system and may
impose state requirements on school districts in order to
improve the academic performance of all districts, schools, and
students based upon the provisions of the Florida K-20 Education
Code, chapters 1000-1013; the federal ESEA and its implementing
regulations; and the ESEA flexibility waiver approved for
Florida by the United States Secretary of Education.
(b) Beginning with the 2011-2012 school year, The
Department of Education shall annually identify each public
school in need of intervention and support to improve student
academic performance. All schools earning a grade of “D” or in
danger of earning a grade of “F” pursuant to s. 1008.34 are
considered schools in need of intervention and support.
(c) To assist in implementing paragraph (4)(a) and (b), the
state board shall adopt by rule a differentiated matrix of
intervention and support strategies for assisting traditional
public schools identified under this section and rules for
implementing s. 1002.33(9)(n), relating to charter schools. The
intervention and support strategies must address student
performance and include extended learning by at least 1 extra
hour, and may include improvement planning, leadership quality
improvement, educator quality improvement, professional
development, curriculum alignment and pacing, and the use of
continuous improvement and monitoring plans and processes. In
addition, the state board may prescribe reporting requirements
to review and monitor the progress of the schools. The rule must
define the intervention and support strategies for school
improvement for schools earning a grade of “D” or “F” and the
roles for the district and department. The rule shall define and
differentiate among schools as follows: earning consecutive
grades of “D” or “F,” or a combination thereof, and provide for
more intense monitoring, intervention, and support strategies
for these schools.
1. A “school-in-need” means a school that has a grade of
“D” or that is in danger of earning a grade of “F,” and that is
in need of intervention and support under paragraph (b);
2. A “turnaround school” means a school with a grade of “F”
or two consecutive grades below a “C” which is in need of
intensive intervention and support and which is implementing a
district-managed turnaround plan or a different turnaround
option approved pursuant to subsection (4). A “turnaround
charter school” is a charter school subject to the requirements
of s. 1002.33(9)(n); and
3. A “persistently low-performing school” means a
turnaround school that has been subject to a differentiated
matrix of intensive intervention and support strategies for more
than 3 consecutive years, or a turnaround school that was closed
pursuant to s. 1008.33(4) within 2 years after the submission of
a notice of intent.

The rule must also define a “low-performing school” to include,
at minimum, any school meeting the requirements of this
subsection.
(4)(a) The state board shall apply intensive the most
intense intervention and support strategies to turnaround
schools earning a grade of “F” or two consecutive grades below a
“C.” “F.” In the first full school year after a school initially
receives earns a turnaround school designation, grade of “F,”
the school district must immediately implement intensive
intervention and support strategies prescribed in rule under
paragraph (3)(c) and, by September 1, provide, select a
turnaround option from those provided in subparagraphs (b)1.-5.,
and submit a plan for implementing the turnaround option to the
department with the memorandum of understanding negotiated
pursuant to s. 1001.42(21) and with a district-managed
turnaround plan for approval by the state board. Upon approval
by the state board, the school district must implement the plan
for the remainder of the school year and continue the plan for 1
full school year for approval by the state board. Upon approval
by the state board, the turnaround option must be implemented in
the following school year.
(b) The turnaround options available to the turnaround a
school district to address a school include one or a combination
of the following turnaround options, giving priority to the
first three options that earns a grade of “F” are:
1. Implement an extended school day with at least 1 hour of
additional learning time. Convert the school to a district
managed turnaround school;
2. Enter into a formal agreement with a nonprofit
organization with tax exempt status under s. 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code to implement an integrated student support
service model that provides students and families with access to
wrap-around services, including, but not limited to, health
services, after-school programs, drug-prevention programs,
college and career readiness, and food and clothing banks.
Districts implementing this option may be eligible for
additional funding as provided in the General Appropriations
Act.
3. Implement a principal autonomy program school, through a
performance contract and in accordance with proposal elements,
criteria, and timelines established by the state board pursuant
to s. 1011.6202(2)(b) specifically tailored for a turnaround
school. For purposes of this section, a school district using
this option for its turnaround school is eligible to participate
in, and receive the benefits of, the principal autonomy program,
pursuant to s. 1011.6202(1) for only the turnaround school.
5.2. Reassign students to another school and monitor the
progress of each reassigned student.;
6.3. Close the school and reopen the school as one or more
charter schools, each with a governing board that has a
demonstrated record of effectiveness.;
4. Contract as a conversion charter school or with an
outside entity that has a demonstrated record of effectiveness
to operate the school.; or
5. Implement a hybrid of turnaround options set forth in
subparagraphs 1.-4. or other turnaround models that have a
demonstrated record of effectiveness.
(c) A school earning a grade of “F” shall have a planning
year followed by 2 full school years to implement the initial
turnaround option selected by the school district and approved
by the state board. Implementation of the turnaround option is
no longer required if the school improves to a grade of “C” or
higher by at least one letter grade.
(d) A school earning a grade of “F” that improves its
letter grade must continue to implement strategies identified in
its school improvement plan pursuant to s. 1001.42(18)(a). The
department must annually review implementation of the school
improvement plan for 3 years to monitor the school’s continued
improvement.
(d)(e) If a turnaround school earning a grade of “F” does
not improve to a grade of “C” or higher by at least one letter
grade after 2 full school years of implementing the turnaround
option selected by the school district under paragraph (b), the
school district must implement select a different option and
submit another turnaround option implementation plan to the
department for approval by the state board. Implementation of
the turnaround option approved plan must begin the school year
following the implementation period of the existing turnaround
option, unless the state board determines that the school is
likely to improve to a grade of “C” or higher a letter grade if
additional time is provided to implement the existing turnaround
option.
(5) A school that earns a grade of “D” for 3 consecutive
years must implement the district-managed turnaround option
pursuant to subparagraph (4)(b)1. The school district must
submit an implementation plan to the department for approval by
the state board.
Section 5. Paragraph (d) of subsection (6) of section
1008.345, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
1008.345 Implementation of state system of school
improvement and education accountability.—
(6)
(d) The commissioner shall assign a community assessment
team to each school district or governing board with a
turnaround school that earned a grade of “F” or three
consecutive grades of “D” pursuant to s. 1008.34 to review the
school performance data and determine causes for the low
performance, including the role of school, area, and district
administrative personnel. The community assessment team shall
review a high school’s graduation rate calculated without high
school equivalency diploma recipients for the past 3 years,
disaggregated by student ethnicity. The team shall make
recommendations to the school board or the governing board and
to the State Board of Education based on the interventions and
support strategies identified pursuant to subsection (5) to
which address the causes of the school’s low performance and to
incorporate the strategies and may be incorporated into the
school improvement plan. The assessment team shall include, but
not be limited to, a department representative, parents,
business representatives, educators, representatives of local
governments, and community activists, and shall represent the
demographics of the community from which they are appointed.
Section 6. Paragraph (i) of subsection (1) of section
1011.62, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
1011.62 Funds for operation of schools.—If the annual
allocation from the Florida Education Finance Program to each
district for operation of schools is not determined in the
annual appropriations act or the substantive bill implementing
the annual appropriations act, it shall be determined as
follows:
(1) COMPUTATION OF THE BASIC AMOUNT TO BE INCLUDED FOR
OPERATION.—The following procedure shall be followed in
determining the annual allocation to each district for
operation:
(i) Calculation of full-time equivalent membership with
respect to dual enrollment instruction.—Students enrolled in
dual enrollment instruction pursuant to s. 1007.271 may be
included in calculations of full-time equivalent student
memberships for basic programs for grades 9 through 12 by a
district school board. Instructional time for dual enrollment
may vary from 900 hours; however, the full-time equivalent
student membership value shall be subject to the provisions in
s. 1011.61(4). Dual enrollment full-time equivalent student
membership shall be calculated in an amount equal to the hours
of instruction that would be necessary to earn the full-time
equivalent student membership for an equivalent course if it
were taught in the school district. Students in dual enrollment
courses may also be calculated as the proportional shares of
full-time equivalent enrollments they generate for a Florida
College System institution or university conducting the dual
enrollment instruction. Early admission students shall be
considered dual enrollments for funding purposes. Students may
be enrolled in dual enrollment instruction provided by an
eligible independent college or university and may be included
in calculations of full-time equivalent student memberships for
basic programs for grades 9 through 12 by a district school
board. However, those provisions of law which exempt dual
enrolled and early admission students from payment of
instructional materials and tuition and fees, including
laboratory fees, shall not apply to students who select the
option of enrolling in an eligible independent institution. An
independent college or university which is located and chartered
in Florida, is not for profit, is accredited by a regional or
national accrediting agency recognized by the United States
Department of Education the Commission on Colleges of the
Southern Association of Colleges and Schools or the Accrediting
Council for Independent Colleges and Schools, and confers
degrees as defined in s. 1005.02 shall be eligible for inclusion
in the dual enrollment or early admission program. Students
enrolled in dual enrollment instruction shall be exempt from the
payment of tuition and fees, including laboratory fees. No
student enrolled in college credit mathematics or English dual
enrollment instruction shall be funded as a dual enrollment
unless the student has successfully completed the relevant
section of the entry-level examination required pursuant to s.
1008.30.
Section 7. Section 1012.732, Florida Statutes, is created
to read:
1012.732 The Florida Best and Brightest Teacher and
Principal Scholar Award Program.—
(1) INTENT.—The Legislature recognizes that, second only to
parents, teachers and principals play the most critical roles
within schools in preparing students to achieve a high level of
academic performance. The Legislature further recognizes that
research has linked student successes and performance outcomes
to the academic achievements and performance accomplishments of
the teachers and principals who most closely affect their
classroom and school learning environments. Therefore, it is the
intent of the Legislature to designate teachers and principals
who have achieved high academic standards during their own
education as Florida’s best and brightest teacher and principal
scholars.
(2) PURPOSE.—There is created the Florida Best and
Brightest Teacher and Principal Scholar Award Program, as a
performance-based scholarship award program, to be administered
by the Department of Education. The performance-based award
shall provide categorical funding for scholarships to be awarded
to full-time classroom teachers, as defined in s. 1012.01(2)(a),
and full-time school administrators, as defined in s.
1012.01(3)(c), excluding substitute teachers or substitute
school administrators, who have demonstrated a high level of
academic achievement and performance.
(3) ELIGIBILITY.—To be eligible for a scholarship, a full
time classroom teacher or full-time school administrator must be
employed on an annual contract or probationary contract pursuant
to s. 1012.335, participate in the school district’s performance
salary schedule pursuant to s. 1012.22, and meet at least one of
the achievement requirements under paragraph (a) and at least
one of the performance requirements under paragraph (b).
(a) Achievement requirements.—
1. For a classroom teacher, a score at or above the 90th
percentile on the Florida Teacher Certification Examination in a
subject that he or she is teaching;
2. For a school administrator, a score at or above the 90th
percentile on the Florida Educational Leadership Examination;
3. For a classroom teacher or school administrator, a
composite score at or above the 80th percentile on either the
SAT or the ACT based on the National Percentile Ranks in effect
when the classroom teacher or school administrator took the
assessment;
4. For a classroom teacher or school administrator, a
composite score on the GRE, LSAT, GMAT, or MCAT at or above a
score adopted by the State Board of Education; or
5. For a classroom teacher or school administrator, a
cumulative undergraduate or graduate grade point average of at
least 3.5 on a 4.0 scale, as verified on the teacher’s or
administrator’s official final college transcript.
(b) Performance requirements.—The classroom teacher or
school administrator:
1. Must have been evaluated as highly effective pursuant to
s. 1012.34 in the school year immediately preceding the year in
which the scholarship will be awarded;
2. If he or she works in a low-performing school or a
school that was designated by the department as low-performing
within the previous 2 years and commits, pursuant to State Board
of Education rule, to working at the school for at least 3
years, must have been evaluated as highly effective pursuant to
s. 1012.34 in the school year immediately preceding the first
year in which the scholarship will be awarded and maintain a
highly effective evaluation rating in at least two of every
three annual performance evaluations, based on a rolling 3-year
period; or
3. Must be newly hired by the district school board, must
not have been evaluated pursuant to s. 1012.34, and must have
met at least one of the following conditions:
a. Be a recipient of the Florida Prepaid Tuition
Scholarship Program pursuant to s. 1009.984 who graduates with a
minimum 3.0 grade point average and commit, pursuant to State
Board of Education rule, to working in a Florida public school
for at least 3 years;
b. Have completed the college reach-out program pursuant to
s. 1007.34 and graduated with a minimum 3.0 grade point average,
and commit, pursuant to State Board of Education rule, to
working in a Florida public school for at least 3 years;
c. Be a Florida college or university graduate of a Florida
teacher preparation program approved pursuant to s. 1004.04,
have graduated with a minimum 3.0 grade point average, and
commit, pursuant to State Board of Education rule, to working in
a critical teacher shortage area under s. 1012.07 at a Florida
public school for at least 3 years; or
d. Be a college or university graduate, have graduated with
a minimum 3.0 grade point average, have worked in a science-,
technology-, engineering-, or mathematics- (STEM-) related field
for at least 3 years, commit to meeting teacher certification
requirements within 3 years, and commit, pursuant to State Board
of Education rule, to teach in a STEM-related classroom at a
Florida public school for at least 3 years.
(4) IMPLEMENTATION.—In order to implement and administer
the program, the following timelines and requirements apply:
(a) To demonstrate eligibility for an award, an eligible
classroom teacher or school administrator, as applicable, must
submit to the school district, no later than November 1, an
official record of his or her achievement of the eligibility
requirements specified in paragraph (3)(a). Once a classroom
teacher or school administrator is deemed eligible by the school
district, including teachers deemed eligible for the Florida
Best and Brightest Teacher Scholarship Program in the 2015-2016
or 2016-2017 fiscal years pursuant to s. 25 of chapter 2016-62,
Laws of Florida, the classroom teacher or school administrator
remains eligible as long as he or she remains employed by the
school district as a full-time classroom teacher or full-time
school administrator at the time of the award and continues to
meet the conditions specified under this section.
(b) Annually, by December 1, each school district shall
submit to the department the number of eligible classroom
teachers and school administrators who qualify for the
scholarship.
(c) Annually, by February 1, the department shall disburse
scholarship funds to each school district for each eligible
classroom teacher and school administrator to receive a
scholarship as provided in the General Appropriations Act.
(d) Annually, by April 1, each school district shall award
the scholarship to each eligible classroom teacher and school
administrator.
(5) FUNDING.—A scholarship in the amount provided in the
General Appropriations Act shall be awarded to every eligible
classroom teacher and school administrator.
(a) If the number of eligible classroom teachers and school
administrators exceeds the total appropriation authorized in the
General Appropriations Act, the department shall prorate the
per-scholar scholarship award amount, except that prior to the
distribution of funds, the following priorities apply:
1. Classroom teachers and school administrators who commit,
pursuant to State Board of Education rule, to work in a low
performing school and meet the performance requirements of
subparagraph (3)(b)2., shall receive an award equal to a full
scholarship award amount. Classroom teachers and school
administrators who do not fulfill the commitment made pursuant
to subparagraph (3)(b)2. may not receive this priority; and
2. Newly hired classroom teachers and school administrators
who commit, pursuant to State Board of Education rule, to work
in a Florida public school and meet the performance requirements
under subparagraph (3)(b)3., shall receive a one-time hiring
bonus of up to $10,000. Classroom teachers and school
administrators who do not fulfill the commitment made pursuant
to subparagraph (3)(b)3. may not receive this priority.
(b) Newly hired classroom teachers and newly hired school
administrators who initially participate in the program pursuant
to subparagraph (3)(b)3. may only receive the one-time hiring
bonus under subparagraph (a)2. In subsequent school years, such
classroom teachers and school administrators may earn a
scholarship award pursuant to subparagraph (3)(b)1. or
subparagraph (3)(b)2., if they also maintain their initial
commitments.
(6) DEFINITION.—For purposes of this section, the term
“school district” includes the Florida School for the Deaf and
the Blind and charter school governing boards.
(7) RULES.—The State Board of Education shall expeditiously
adopt rules to implement this section.
Section 8. If any law amended by this act was also amended
by a law enacted during the 2017 Regular Session of the
Legislature, such laws shall be construed as if they had been
enacted during the same session of the Legislature and full
effect shall be given to each if possible.
Section 9. This act shall take effect July 1, 2017, or upon
becoming a law, whichever occurs later.