A bill to be entitled                      
An act relating to determining bail; amending s.
903.046, F.S.; revising the purpose of a bail
determination; creating a presumption that individuals
arrested for allegedly committing nonviolent
misdemeanors be released on nonmonetary conditions or
nonmonetary restrictions; defining the term
“nonviolent misdemeanor”; restricting the
determinations a court must consider for bail or other
conditions for persons committing crimes other than
nonviolent misdemeanor offenses; amending s. 903.0471,
F.S.; authorizing a court to revoke pretrial release
and order pretrial detention if the court finds
probable cause to believe that the defendant committed
a new violent crime or a new dangerous crime while on
pretrial release; amending s. 907.041, F.S.; revising
legislative intent; making technical changes; amending
s. 790.065, F.S.; conforming a cross-reference;
providing an effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:

Section 1. Section 903.046, Florida Statutes, is amended to
read:
903.046 Purpose of, presumption in, and criteria for bail
determination.—
(1) The purpose of a bail determination in criminal
proceedings is to ensure the appearance of a violent the
criminal defendant at subsequent proceedings and to protect the
community against unreasonable danger from the violent criminal
defendant.
(2) There is a presumption that an individual arrested for
allegedly committing a nonviolent misdemeanor crime will be
released on nonmonetary conditions or nonmonetary restrictions
while he or she awaits trial. As used in this subsection, the
term “nonviolent misdemeanor” excludes assault as defined in s.
784.011.
(3)(2) For an individual who is alleged to have committed a
crime not included in subsection (2), when determining whether
to release a defendant on bail or other conditions, and what
that bail or those conditions may be, the court shall consider:
(a) The nature and circumstances of the offense charged.
(b) The weight of the evidence against the defendant.
(c) The defendant’s family ties, length of residence in the
community, employment history, financial resources, and mental
condition.
(d) The defendant’s past and present conduct, including any
record of convictions, previous flight to avoid prosecution, or
failure to appear at court proceedings. However, any defendant
who had failed to appear on the day of any required court
proceeding in the case at issue, but who had later voluntarily
appeared or surrendered, shall not be eligible for a
recognizance bond; and any defendant who failed to appear on the
day of any required court proceeding in the case at issue and
who was later arrested shall not be eligible for a recognizance
bond or for any form of bond which does not require a monetary
undertaking or commitment equal to or greater than $2,000 or
twice the value of the monetary commitment or undertaking of the
original bond, whichever is greater. Notwithstanding anything in
this section, the court has discretion in determining conditions
of release if the defendant proves circumstances beyond his or
her control for the failure to appear. This section may not be
construed as imposing additional duties or obligations on a
governmental entity related to monetary bonds.
(e) The nature and probability of danger which the
defendant’s release poses to the community.
(f) The source of funds used to post bail or procure an
appearance bond, particularly whether the proffered funds, real
property, property, or any proposed collateral or bond premium
may be linked to or derived from the crime alleged to have been
committed or from any other criminal or illicit activities. The
burden of establishing the noninvolvement in or nonderivation
from criminal or other illicit activity of such proffered funds,
real property, property, or any proposed collateral or bond
premium falls upon the defendant or other person proffering them
to obtain the defendant’s release.
(g) Whether the defendant is already on release pending
resolution of another criminal proceeding or on probation,
parole, or other release pending completion of a sentence.
(h) The street value of any drug or controlled substance
connected to or involved in the criminal charge. It is the
finding and intent of the Legislature that crimes involving
drugs and other controlled substances are of serious social
concern, that the flight of defendants to avoid prosecution is
of similar serious social concern, and that frequently such
defendants are able to post monetary bail using the proceeds of
their unlawful enterprises to defeat the social utility of
pretrial bail. Therefore, the courts should carefully consider
the utility and necessity of substantial bail in relation to the
street value of the drugs or controlled substances involved.
(i) The nature and probability of intimidation and danger
to victims.
(j) Whether there is probable cause to believe that the
defendant committed a new crime while on pretrial release.
(k) Any other facts that the court considers relevant.
(l) Whether the crime charged is a violation of chapter 874
or alleged to be subject to enhanced punishment under chapter
874 or reclassification under s. 843.22. If any such violation
is charged against a defendant or if the defendant is charged
with a crime that is alleged to be subject to such enhancement
or reclassification, he or she is not eligible for release on
bail or surety bond until the first appearance on the case in
order to ensure the full participation of the prosecutor and the
protection of the public.
(m) Whether the defendant, other than a defendant whose
only criminal charge is a misdemeanor offense under chapter 316,
is required to register as a sexual offender under s. 943.0435
or a sexual predator under s. 775.21; and, if so, he or she is
not eligible for release on bail or surety bond until the first
appearance on the case in order to ensure the full participation
of the prosecutor and the protection of the public.
Section 2. Section 903.0471, Florida Statutes, is amended
to read:
903.0471 Violation of condition of pretrial release.
Notwithstanding s. 907.041, A court may, on its own motion,
revoke pretrial release and order pretrial detention if the
court finds probable cause to believe that the defendant
committed a new violent crime or a new dangerous crime, as
defined in s. 907.041, while on pretrial release.
Section 3. Subsection (1), paragraph (a) of subsection (3),
and paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of subsection (4) of section
907.041, Florida Statutes, are amended to read:
907.041 Pretrial detention and release.—
(1) LEGISLATIVE INTENT.—It is the policy of this state that
persons committing violent or serious criminal offenses, posing
a threat to the safety of the community or the integrity of the
judicial process, or failing to appear at trial be detained upon
arrest. However, persons committing nonviolent misdemeanor
offenses and not posing a threat to the safety of the community
found to meet specified criteria shall be released under certain
conditions until proceedings are concluded and adjudication has
been determined. The Legislature finds that this policy of
pretrial detention and release will assure the detention of
those persons posing a threat to society while reducing the
costs for incarceration by releasing, until trial, those persons
not considered a danger to the community who meet certain
criteria. It is the intent of the Legislature that the primary
consideration for detaining an individual is whether the
individual presents a be the protection of the community from
risk of physical harm to persons.
(3) RELEASE ON NONMONETARY CONDITIONS.—
(a) It is the intent of the Legislature that individuals
arrested for nonviolent misdemeanors who do not pose a threat to
the safety of the community shall be released to create a
presumption in favor of release on nonmonetary conditions while
they await trial for any person who is granted pretrial release
unless such person is charged with a dangerous crime as defined
in subsection (4). Such person shall be released on monetary
conditions if it is determined that such monetary conditions are
necessary to assure the presence of the person at trial or at
other proceedings, to protect the community from risk of
physical harm to persons, to assure the presence of the accused
at trial, or to assure the integrity of the judicial process.
(4) PRETRIAL DETENTION.—
(a) A person charged with a dangerous crime, as defined in
paragraph (b), may not be granted pretrial release at a first
appearance hearing; however, the court may release the accused
person on electronic monitoring or on recognizance bond if the
findings on the record of facts and circumstances warrant such a
release.
(b) As used in this subsection, “dangerous crime” means any
of the following:
1. Arson;
2. Aggravated assault;
3. Aggravated battery;
4. Illegal use of explosives;
5. Child abuse or aggravated child abuse;
6. Abuse of an elderly person or disabled adult, or
aggravated abuse of an elderly person or disabled adult;
7. Aircraft piracy;
8. Kidnapping;
9. Homicide;
10. Manslaughter;
11. Sexual battery;
12. Robbery;
13. Carjacking;
14. Lewd, lascivious, or indecent assault or act upon or in
presence of a child under the age of 16 years;
15. Sexual activity with a child, who is 12 years of age or
older but less than 18 years of age, by or at solicitation of
person in familial or custodial authority;
16. Burglary of a dwelling;
17. Stalking and aggravated stalking;
18. Act of domestic violence as defined in s. 741.28;
19. Home invasion robbery;
20. Act of terrorism as defined in s. 775.30;
21. Manufacturing any substances in violation of chapter
893;
22. Attempting or conspiring to commit any such crime; and
23. Human trafficking.
(b) No person charged with a dangerous crime shall be
granted nonmonetary pretrial release at a first appearance
hearing; however, the court shall retain the discretion to
release an accused on electronic monitoring or on recognizance
bond if the findings on the record of facts and circumstances
warrant such a release.
(c) The court may order pretrial detention if it finds a
substantial probability, based on a defendant’s past and present
patterns of behavior, the criteria in s. 903.046, and any other
relevant facts, that any of the following circumstances exist:
1. The defendant has previously violated conditions of
release and that no further conditions of release are reasonably
likely to assure the defendant’s appearance at subsequent
proceedings;
2. The defendant, with the intent to obstruct the judicial
process, has threatened, intimidated, or injured any victim,
potential witness, juror, or judicial officer, or has attempted
or conspired to do so, and that no condition of release will
reasonably prevent the obstruction of the judicial process;
3. The defendant is charged with trafficking in controlled
substances as defined by s. 893.135, that there is a substantial
probability that the defendant has committed the offense, and
that no conditions of release will reasonably assure the
defendant’s appearance at subsequent criminal proceedings;
4. The defendant is charged with DUI manslaughter, as
defined by s. 316.193, and that there is a substantial
probability that the defendant committed the crime and that the
defendant poses a threat of harm to the community; a condition
conditions that would support a finding by the court pursuant to
this subparagraph that the defendant poses a threat of harm to
the community is if include, but are not limited to, any of the
following:
a. the defendant has previously been convicted of any crime
under s. 316.193, or of any crime in any other state or
territory of the United States that is substantially similar to
any crime under s. 316.193;
b. The defendant was driving with a suspended driver
license when the charged crime was committed; or
c. The defendant has previously been found guilty of, or
has had adjudication of guilt withheld for, driving while the
defendant’s driver license was suspended or revoked in violation
of s. 322.34;
5. The defendant poses the threat of harm to the community.
The court may so conclude, if it finds that the defendant is
presently charged with a dangerous crime as defined in paragraph
(b), that there is a substantial probability that the defendant
committed such crime, that the factual circumstances of the
crime indicate a disregard for the safety of the community, and
that there are no conditions of release reasonably sufficient to
protect the community from the risk of physical harm to persons;
6. The defendant was on probation, parole, or other release
pending completion of sentence or on pretrial release for a
dangerous crime at the time the current offense was committed;
7. The defendant has violated one or more conditions of
pretrial release or bond for the offense currently before the
court and the violation, in the discretion of the court,
supports a finding that no conditions of release can reasonably
protect the community from risk of physical harm to persons or
assure the presence of the accused at trial; or
8.a. The defendant has ever been sentenced pursuant to s.
775.082(9) or s. 775.084 as a prison releasee reoffender,
habitual violent felony offender, three-time violent felony
offender, or violent career criminal, or the state attorney
files a notice seeking that the defendant be sentenced pursuant
to s. 775.082(9) or s. 775.084, as a prison releasee reoffender,
habitual violent felony offender, three-time violent felony
offender, or violent career criminal;
b. There is a substantial probability that the defendant
committed the offense; and
c. There are no conditions of release that can reasonably
protect the community from risk of physical harm or ensure the
presence of the accused at trial.
Section 4. Paragraph (c) of subsection (2) of section
790.065, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
790.065 Sale and delivery of firearms.—
(2) Upon receipt of a request for a criminal history record
check, the Department of Law Enforcement shall, during the
licensee’s call or by return call, forthwith:
(c)1. Review any records available to it to determine
whether the potential buyer or transferee has been indicted or
has had an information filed against her or him for an offense
that is a felony under either state or federal law, or, as
mandated by federal law, has had an injunction for protection
against domestic violence entered against the potential buyer or
transferee under s. 741.30, has had an injunction for protection
against repeat violence entered against the potential buyer or
transferee under s. 784.046, or has been arrested for a
dangerous crime as specified in s. 907.041(4)(b) s.
907.041(4)(a) or for any of the following enumerated offenses:
a. Criminal anarchy under ss. 876.01 and 876.02.
b. Extortion under s. 836.05.
c. Explosives violations under s. 552.22(1) and (2).
d. Controlled substances violations under chapter 893.
e. Resisting an officer with violence under s. 843.01.
f. Weapons and firearms violations under this chapter.
g. Treason under s. 876.32.
h. Assisting self-murder under s. 782.08.
i. Sabotage under s. 876.38.
j. Stalking or aggravated stalking under s. 784.048.

If the review indicates any such indictment, information, or
arrest, the department shall provide to the licensee a
conditional nonapproval number.
2. Within 24 working hours, the department shall determine
the disposition of the indictment, information, or arrest and
inform the licensee as to whether the potential buyer is
prohibited from receiving or possessing a firearm. For purposes
of this paragraph, “working hours” means the hours from 8 a.m.
to 5 p.m. Monday through Friday, excluding legal holidays.
3. The office of the clerk of court, at no charge to the
department, shall respond to any department request for data on
the disposition of the indictment, information, or arrest as
soon as possible, but in no event later than 8 working hours.
4. The department shall determine as quickly as possible
within the allotted time period whether the potential buyer is
prohibited from receiving or possessing a firearm.
5. If the potential buyer is not so prohibited, or if the
department cannot determine the disposition information within
the allotted time period, the department shall provide the
licensee with a conditional approval number.
6. If the buyer is so prohibited, the conditional
nonapproval number shall become a nonapproval number.
7. The department shall continue its attempts to obtain the
disposition information and may retain a record of all approval
numbers granted without sufficient disposition information. If
the department later obtains disposition information which
indicates:
a. That the potential buyer is not prohibited from owning a
firearm, it shall treat the record of the transaction in
accordance with this section; or
b. That the potential buyer is prohibited from owning a
firearm, it shall immediately revoke the conditional approval
number and notify local law enforcement.
8. During the time that disposition of the indictment,
information, or arrest is pending and until the department is
notified by the potential buyer that there has been a final
disposition of the indictment, information, or arrest, the
conditional nonapproval number shall remain in effect.
Section 5. This act shall take effect July 1, 2018.