A bill to be entitled
An act relating to lands used for governmental
purposes; amending s. 253.025, F.S.; providing
conditions under which specified appraisal standards
are required for the acquisition of lands for the
purpose of buffering military installations against
encroachment; authorizing such lands to be leased or
conveyed for less than appraised value to military
installations; providing requirements for such leasing
and conveyance; authorizing the use of certain funding
sources for the immediate acquisition of lands that
prevent or satisfy private property rights claims
within areas of critical state concern; providing
procedures for estimating the value of such lands
under certain conditions; amending s. 259.045, F.S.;
authorizing the Department of Environmental Protection
to acquire conservation and recreation lands to
prevent or satisfy private property rights claims
within areas of critical state concern; providing
procedures for estimating the value of such lands
under certain conditions; amending s. 259.105, F.S.;
including natural disaster and flood mitigation as
criteria for assessing certain projects and land
acquisitions under the Florida Forever Act; amending
s. 288.980, F.S.; directing the Department of Economic
Opportunity and the Florida Defense Support Task Force
to provide an annual list of land acquisitions for the
purpose of buffering military installations against
encroachment; providing requirements for the annual
list; revising the definition of the term
"nonconservation lands"; amending s. 380.0555, F.S.;
revising the legislative intent of the Apalachicola
Bay Area Protection Act; amending s. 380.0666, F.S.;
authorizing land authorities to contribute tourist
impact tax revenues to counties to pay for project
costs relating to the construction, redevelopment, and
preservation of certain affordable housing; amending
s. 380.508, F.S.; requiring that urban greenways and
open space projects undertaken, coordinated, or funded
by the Florida Communities Trust meet certain
criteria; providing an effective date.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:
Section 1.         Subsection (23) of section 253.025, Florida
Statutes, is renumbered as subsection (25), subsections (21) and
(22) of that section are amended, and new subsections (23) and
(24) are added to that section, to read:
253.025       Acquisition of state lands.--
(21)(a)       The board of trustees may acquire, pursuant to s.
288.980(2)(b), nonconservation lands from the annual list
submitted by the Department of Economic Opportunity for the
purpose of buffering a military installation against
encroachment.
(b)      If federal partnership funds are available before the
military installation buffer land is acquired, the Division of
State Lands shall apply yellow book appraisal standards and must
disclose the appraised value to the seller.
(c)      Following acquisition of the military installation
buffer land, the board of trustees is authorized, in accordance
with the installation's procedures, the laws of this state, and
the terms of the management and monitoring agreement provided in
s. 288.980(2)(b), to:
1.      Convey the land at less than appraised value to the
military installation;
2.      Lease the land at less than appraised or market value
to the military installation; or
3.      Lease the land at rates determined by competitive bid,
which may be less than appraised or market value, to private
entities to conduct agricultural or silvicultural operations
under terms requiring approval of the military installation and
that must implement the best management practices applicable to
such operations as adopted by the Department of Agriculture and
Consumer Services.
(d)      A conveyance at less than appraised value must state
that the land will revert to the board of trustees if the land
is not used for its intended purposes as a military installation
buffer or if the military installation closes.
(22)        The board of trustees, by an affirmative vote of at
least three members, may direct the Department of Environmental
Protection to purchase lands on an immediate basis using up to
15 percent of the funds allocated to the department pursuant to
s. 259.105 for the acquisition of lands that:
(a)     Are listed or placed at auction by the Federal
Government as part of the Resolution Trust Corporation sale of
lands from failed savings and loan associations;
(b)     Are listed or placed at auction by the Federal
Government as part of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
sale of lands from failed banks; or
(c)     Will be developed or otherwise lost to potential
public ownership, or for which federal matching funds will be
lost, by the time the land can be purchased under the program
within which the land is listed for acquisition; or
(d)     Will prevent or satisfy private property rights claims
resulting from limitations imposed by the designation of an area
of critical state concern pursuant to chapter 380.
For such acquisitions, the board of trustees may waive or modify
all procedures required for land acquisition pursuant to this
chapter and all competitive bid procedures required pursuant to
chapters 255 and 287. Lands acquired pursuant to this subsection
must, at the time of purchase, be on one of the acquisition
lists established pursuant to chapter 259, or be essential for
water resource development, protection, or restoration, or a
significant portion of the lands must contain natural
communities or plant or animal species that are listed by the
Florida Natural Areas Inventory as critically imperiled,
imperiled, or rare, or as excellent quality occurrences of
natural communities.
(23)        The board of trustees, by an affirmative vote of at
least three members, may direct the division to purchase lands
on an immediate basis that will prevent or satisfy private
property rights claims resulting from limitations imposed by the
designation of an area of critical state concern pursuant to
chapter 380.
(24)        For acquisitions directed pursuant to subsection (22)
or subsection (23):
(a)     The board of trustees may waive or modify all
procedures required for land acquisition pursuant to this
chapter and all competitive bid procedures required pursuant to
chapters 255 and 287; and
(b)     If a parcel is estimated to be worth $500,000 or less
and the director of the Division of State Lands finds that the
cost of an outside appraisal is not justified, a comparable
sales analysis, an appraisal prepared by the division, or other
reasonably prudent procedure may be used by the division to
estimate the value of the land, provided the public interest is
reasonably protected.
Section 2.         Subsection (6) of section 259.045, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
259.045       Purchase of lands in areas of critical state
concern; recommendations by department and land authorities.--
Within 45 days after the Administration Commission designates an
area as an area of critical state concern under s. 380.05, and
annually thereafter, the Department of Environmental Protection
shall consider the recommendations of the state land planning
agency pursuant to s. 380.05(1)(a) relating to purchase of lands
within an area of critical state concern or lands outside an
area of critical state concern that directly impact an area of
critical state concern, which may include lands used to preserve
and protect water supply, and shall make recommendations to the
board with respect to the purchase of the fee or any lesser
interest in any such lands that are:
(6)     Lands used to prevent or satisfy private property
rights claims resulting from limitations imposed by the
designation of an area of critical state concern if the
acquisition of such lands fulfills a public purpose listed in s.
259.032(2) or if the parcel is wholly or partially, at the time
of acquisition, on one of the board's approved acquisition lists
established pursuant to this chapter. For the purposes of this
subsection, if a parcel is estimated to be worth $500,000 or
less and the director of the Division of State Lands finds that
the cost of an outside appraisal is not justified, a comparable
sales analysis, an appraisal prepared by the Division of State
Lands, or other reasonably prudent procedures may be used by the
Division of State Lands to estimate the value of the parcel,
provided the public's interest is reasonably protected.
The department, a local government, a special district, or a
land authority within an area of critical state concern may make
recommendations with respect to additional purchases which were
not included in the state land planning agency recommendations.
Section 3.         Paragraph (i) is added to subsection (4) of
section 259.105, Florida Statutes, to read:
259.105       The Florida Forever Act.--
(4)     It is the intent of the Legislature that projects or
acquisitions funded pursuant to paragraphs (3)(a) and (b)
contribute to the achievement of the following goals, which
shall be evaluated in accordance with specific criteria and
numeric performance measures developed pursuant to s.
259.035(4):
(i)     Mitigate the effects of natural disasters and floods
in developed areas, as measured by:
1.      The number of acres acquired within a 100-year
floodplain or a coastal high hazard area;
2.      The number of acres acquired or developed to serve dual
functions as:
a.      Flow ways or temporary water storage areas during
flooding or high water events, not including permanent
reservoirs; and
b.      Greenways or open spaces available to the public for
recreation;
3.      The number of acres that protect existing open spaces
and natural buffer areas within a floodplain that also serve as
natural flow ways or natural temporary water storage areas; and
4.      The percentage of the land acquired within the project
boundary that creates additional open spaces, natural buffer
areas, and greenways within a floodplain, while precluding
rebuilding in areas that repeatedly flood.
Florida Forever projects and acquisitions funded pursuant to
paragraph (3)(c) shall be measured by goals developed by rule by
the Florida Communities Trust Governing Board created in s.
380.504.
Section 4.         Paragraphs (b) and (c) of subsection (2) of
section 288.980, Florida Statutes, are amended to read:
288.980       Military base retention; legislative intent;
grants program.--
(2)
(b)1.       The department shall annually request military
installations in the state to provide the department with a list
of base buffering encroachment lands for fee simple or less-
than-fee simple acquisitions before October 1.
2.      The department shall submit the list of base buffering
encroachment lands to the Florida Defense Support Task Force,
created in s. 288.987.
3.      The Florida Defense Support Task Force shall, annually
by December 1, review the list of base buffering encroachment
lands submitted by the military installations and provide its
recommendations for ranking the lands for acquisition to the
department.
4.      The department shall annually submit the list of base
buffering encroachment lands provided by the Florida Defense
Support Task Force to the Board of Trustees of the Internal
Improvement Trust Fund, which may acquire the lands pursuant to
s. 253.025. At a minimum, the annual list must contain for each
recommended land acquisition:
a.      A legal description of the land and its property
identification number;
b.      A detailed map of the land; and
c.      A management and monitoring agreement to ensure the
land serves a base buffering purpose The department may annually
submit a list to the Board of Trustees of the Internal
Improvement Trust Fund of nonconservation lands to acquire,
subject to a specific appropriation, through fee simple purchase
or through perpetual, less-than-fee interest purchase, for the
purpose of buffering a military installation against
encroachment. The Board of Trustees of the Internal Improvement
Trust Fund shall also consider the recommendations of the
Florida Defense Support Task Force, created in s. 288.987, when
selecting nonconservation lands to purchase for the purpose of
securing and protecting a military installation against
encroachment. This paragraph does not preclude the acquisition
of such lands by local governments through fee simple purchase
or through perpetual, less-than-fee interest purchase, for the
purpose of buffering a military installation against
encroachment.
(c)     As used in this subsection, the term "nonconservation
lands" means lands acquired for uses other than conservation,
outdoor resource-based recreation, or archaeological or historic
preservation not subject to acquisition by the Florida Forever
Program.
Section 5.         Paragraphs (h) and (i) are added to subsection
(2) of section 380.0555, Florida Statutes, to read:
380.0555          Apalachicola Bay Area; protection and designation
as area of critical state concern.--
(2)     LEGISLATIVE INTENT.--It is hereby declared that the
intent of the Legislature is:
(h)     To provide affordable housing in close proximity to
places of employment in the Apalachicola Bay Area.
(i)     To protect and improve the water quality of the
Apalachicola Bay Area through federal, state, and local funding
of water quality improvement projects, including the
construction and operation of wastewater management facilities
that meet state requirements.
Section 6.          Subsection (3) of section 380.0666, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
380.0666          Powers of land authority.--The land authority
shall have all the powers necessary or convenient to carry out
and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this act,
including the following powers, which are in addition to all
other powers granted by other provisions of this act:
(3)(a)       To acquire and dispose of real and personal
property or any interest therein when such acquisition is
necessary or appropriate to protect the natural environment,
provide public access or public recreational facilities,
preserve wildlife habitat areas, provide affordable housing to
families whose income does not exceed 160 percent of the median
family income for the area, prevent or satisfy private property
rights claims resulting from limitations imposed by the
designation of an area of critical state concern, or provide
access to management of acquired lands; to acquire interests in
land by means of land exchanges; to contribute tourist impact
tax revenues received pursuant to s. 125.0108 to the county in
which it is located and its most populous municipality or the
housing authority of such county or municipality, at the request
of the county commission or the commission or council of such
municipality, for the construction, redevelopment, or
preservation of affordable housing in an area of critical state
concern within such municipality or any other area of the
county; to contribute funds to the Department of Environmental
Protection for the purchase of lands by the department; and to
enter into all alternatives to the acquisition of fee interests
in land, including, but not limited to, the acquisition of
easements, development rights, life estates, leases, and
leaseback arrangements. However, the land authority shall make
an acquisition or contribution only if:
1.(a)       Such acquisition or contribution is consistent with
land development regulations and local comprehensive plans
adopted and approved pursuant to this chapter;
2.(b)       The property acquired is within an area designated
as an area of critical state concern at the time of acquisition
or is within an area that was designated as an area of critical
state concern for at least 20 consecutive years before prior to
removal of the designation;
3.(c)       The property to be acquired has not been selected
for purchase through another local, regional, state, or federal
public land acquisition program. Such restriction does shall not
apply if the land authority cooperates with the other public
land acquisition programs which listed the lands for
acquisition, to coordinate the acquisition and disposition of
such lands. In such cases, the land authority may enter into
contractual or other agreements to acquire lands jointly or for
eventual resale to other public land acquisition programs; and
4.(d)       The acquisition or contribution is not used to
improve public transportation facilities or otherwise increase
road capacity to reduce hurricane evacuation clearance times.
(b)      To use revenues received pursuant to s. 125.0108 to
pay costs related to affordable housing projects, including:
1.      The cost of acquiring real property and any buildings
thereon, including payments for contracts to purchase
properties;
2.      The cost of site preparation, demolition, environmental
remediation that is not reimbursed by another governmental
funding program, and development;
3.      Professional fees in connection with the planning,
design, and construction of the project, such as those of
architects, engineers, attorneys, and accountants;
4.      The cost of studies, surveys, and plans;
5.      The cost of the construction, rehabilitation, and
equipping of the project, excluding permit and impact fees and
mitigation requirements;
6.      The cost of on-site land improvements, such as
landscaping, parking, and ingress and egress, excluding permit
and impact fees and mitigation requirements; and
7.      The cost of offsite access roads, except those required
to meet hurricane evacuation clearance times.
Section 7.         Paragraph (f) of subsection (4) of section
380.508, Florida Statutes, is redesignated as paragraph (g), and
a new paragraph (f) is added to that subsection, to read:
380.508       Projects; development, review, and approval.--
(4)     Projects or activities which the trust undertakes,
coordinates, or funds in any manner shall comply with the
following guidelines:
(f)     The purpose of urban greenways and open space projects
shall be to provide recreational opportunities, promote
community interaction, and connect communities. Urban greenways
and open space projects may also serve dual functions as flow
ways or temporary water storage areas, not including permanent
reservoirs, to mitigate natural disasters and floods in
developed areas.
Project costs may include costs of providing parks, open space,
public access sites, scenic easements, and other areas and
facilities serving the public where such features are part of a
project plan approved according to this part. In undertaking or
coordinating projects or activities authorized by this part, the
trust shall, when appropriate, use and promote the use of
creative land acquisition methods, including the acquisition of
less than fee interest through, among other methods,
conservation easements, transfer of development rights, leases,
and leaseback arrangements. The trust shall assist local
governments in the use of sound alternative methods of financing
for funding projects and activities authorized under this part.
Any funds over and above eligible project costs, which remain
after completion of a project approved according to this part,
shall be transmitted to the state and deposited into the Florida
Forever Trust Fund.
Section 8.         This act shall take effect upon becoming a law.