A bill to be entitled                      
An act relating to government actions discriminating
against businesses; providing a short title; creating
s. 760.65, F.S.; providing definitions; prohibiting
certain discriminatory actions by governmental
entities against business entities; providing an
effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:

Section 1. This act may be cited as the “Free Enterprise
Protection Act.”
Section 2. Section 760.65, Florida Statutes, is created to
read:
760.65 Discriminatory action by government against
businesses.—
(1) As used in this section, the term:
(a) “Business entity” means a sole proprietorship,
corporation, limited liability company, limited liability
partnership, or other legal entity, association, or body vested
with the power or function of a legal entity.
(b) “Discriminatory action” means any action taken by a
government entity to:
1. Alter in any way the tax treatment of, or cause any tax,
penalty, or payment to be assessed against a business entity;
2. Deny, delay, or revoke a business entity’s exemption
from taxation or other tax benefit;
3. Withhold, reduce, exclude, terminate, deny, or otherwise
make unavailable to a business entity any grant, contract,
subcontract, cooperative agreement, bond issue, license,
certification, or other similar opportunity, position, or
status; or
4. Withhold, reduce, exclude, terminate, deny, or otherwise
make unavailable to a business entity access or an entitlement
to property, facilities, speech forums, including traditional,
limited, and nonpublic forums, or charitable fundraising
campaigns.
(c) “Governmental entity” means any branch, department,
agency, commission, or instrumentality of state government or
any political subdivision of the state and any official or other
person acting under color of state law.
(2) A governmental entity shall not take discriminatory
action against a business entity:
(a) On the basis of the internal policies of the business
entity, including, but not limited to, personnel and employee
benefit policies that are in compliance with state law.
(b) Because of the business entity’s exercise of a right
guaranteed under the state or federal constitutions, including,
but not limited to, the rights of freedom of expression and free
exercise of religion.
Section 3. This act shall take effect July 1, 2018.