A bill to be entitled
An act relating to service of process; amending s.
48.021, F.S.; revising authority of special process
servers; revising a cross-reference; requiring that
civil witness subpoenas be served by certain persons;
amending s. 48.031, F.S.; revising requirements for
substituted service on the spouse of the person to be
served; revising requirements for documenting service
of process; conforming terminology; amending s.
48.062, F.S.; revising requirements for service on
limited liability companies; amending s. 48.194, F.S.;
revising provisions specifying who may serve process
outside of the state; revising requirements for
documenting that service has been properly made
outside the state; amending s. 48.21, F.S.; revising
requirements for return-of-service forms; authorizing
certain persons to electronically sign return-of-
service forms; amending s. 48.27, F.S.; revising
authority of certified process servers; conforming
terminology; providing an effective date.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:
Section 1.        Subsection (1) of section 48.021, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
48.021      Process; by whom served.--
(1)     All process shall be served by the sheriff of the
county where the person to be served is found, except initial
nonenforceable civil process, criminal witness subpoenas, and
criminal summonses may be served by a special process server
appointed by the sheriff as provided for in this section or by a
certified process server as provided for in s. 48.27 ss. 48.25-
48.31. Civil witness subpoenas shall may be served by any person
authorized by rules of civil procedure.
Section 2.        Subsections (2) and (5) and paragraph (a) of
subsection (6) of section 48.031, Florida Statutes, are amended
to read:
48.031      Service of process generally; service of witness
subpoenas.--
(2)(a)      Substituted Substitute service may be made on the
spouse of the person to be served may be made at any place in a
the county by an individual authorized under s. 48.021 or s.
48.27 to serve process in that county, if the cause of action is
not an adversarial adversary proceeding between the spouse and
the person to be served, if the spouse requests such service,
and if the spouse and person to be served reside are residing
together in the same dwelling, regardless of whether such
dwelling is located in the county where substituted service is
made.
(b)     Substituted Substitute service may be made on an
individual doing business as a sole proprietorship at his or her
place of business, during regular business hours, by serving the
person in charge of the business at the time of service if two
attempts to serve the owner are have been made at the place of
business.
(5)     A person serving process shall place, on the first
page only of at least one of the processes served, the date and
time of service, his or her initials, and, if applicable, his or
her identification number and initials for all service of
process. The person serving process shall list on the return-of-
service form all initial pleadings delivered and served along
with the process. The person requesting service or the person
authorized to serve the process shall file the return-of-service
form with the court.
(6)(a)      If the only address for a person to be served which
is discoverable through public records is a private mailbox, a
virtual office, or an executive office or mini suite,
substituted substitute service may be made by leaving a copy of
the process with the person in charge of the private mailbox,
virtual office, or executive office or mini suite, but only if
the process server determines that the person to be served
maintains a mailbox, a virtual office, or an executive office or
mini suite at that location.
Section 3.        Subsection (4) of section 48.062, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
48.062      Service on a limited liability company.--
(4)     If the address provided for the registered agent,
member, or manager is a residence, a or private mailbox, a
virtual office, or an executive office or mini suite, service on
the domestic or foreign limited liability company, domestic or
foreign, may be made by serving the registered agent, member, or
manager in accordance with s. 48.031.
Section 4.        Subsection (1) of section 48.194, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
48.194      Personal service outside state.--
(1)     Except as otherwise provided herein, service of
process on persons outside of this state shall be made in the
same manner as service within this state by any person officer
authorized to serve process in the state where the person is
served. No order of court is required. An affidavit of the
officer shall be filed, stating the time, manner, and place of
service. A The court may consider the return-of-service form
described in s. 48.21 affidavit, or any other competent
evidence, in determining whether service has been properly made.
Service of process on persons outside the United States may be
required to conform to the provisions of the Hague Convention on
the Service Abroad of Judicial and Extrajudicial Documents in
Civil or Commercial Matters.
Section 5.        Subsection (1) of section 48.21, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
48.21       Return of execution of process.--
(1)     Each person who effects service of process shall note
on a return-of-service form attached thereto, the date and time
when it comes to hand, the date and time when it is served, the
manner of service, the name of the person on whom it was served,
and, if the person is served in a representative capacity, the
position occupied by the person. The return-of-service form must
list all pleadings served and be signed by the person who
effects the service of process. However, a person who is
authorized under this chapter to serve process and employed by a
sheriff who effects such the service of process may sign the
return-of-service form using an electronic signature certified
by the sheriff.
Section 6.        Paragraph (a) of subsection (2) of section
48.27, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
48.27       Certified process servers.--
(2)(a)       The addition of a person's name to the list
authorizes him or her to serve initial nonenforceable civil
process on a person found within the circuit where the process
server is certified when a civil action is has been filed
against such person in the circuit court or in a county court in
the state. Upon filing an action in circuit or county court, a
person may select from the list for the circuit where the
process is to be served one or more certified process servers to
serve initial nonenforceable civil process.
Section 7.        This act shall take effect July 1, 2018.