A bill to be entitled
An act relating to public meetings; amending s.
286.011, F.S.; defining terms; specifying conditions
under which members of any board or commission of any
state agency or authority or of any agency or
authority of any county, municipal corporation, or
political subdivision may participate in fact-finding
exercises or excursions; providing an effective date.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:
Section 1.         Subsection (1) of section 286.011, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
286.011       Public meetings and records; public inspection;
criminal and civil penalties.--
(1)(a)       As used in this section, the term:
1.      "De facto meeting" means the use of board or commission
staff or third parties, acting as intermediaries, to facilitate
a discussion of public business between or among board or
commission members.
2.      "Discussion" means a conversation between or among
board or commission members regardless of whether through oral,
written, electronic, or any other form of communication.
3.      "Meeting" means a gathering, whether formal or
informal, of two or more members elected to or of the same board
or commission, even if they have not yet taken office.
4.      "Official act" means the adoption of a resolution or
rule or other formal action being taken by the board or
commission.
5.      "Public business" means any matter before, or
foreseeably expected to come before, the board or commission.
(b)      Except as otherwise provided in the State
Constitution, all meetings or de facto meetings of any board or
commission of any state agency or authority or of any agency or
authority of any county, municipal corporation, or political
subdivision at which official acts are to be taken or public
business is to be transacted or discussed are declared to be
public meetings open to the public., except as otherwise
provided in the Constitution, including meetings with or
attended by any person elected to such board or commission, but
who has not yet taken office, at which official acts are to be
taken are declared to be public meetings open to the public at
all times, and
(c)      Members of the same board or commission may
participate in fact-finding exercises or excursions to research
public business, and may participate in meetings with a member
of the Legislature, if:
1.      The board or commission provides reasonable notice;
2.      The exercise, excursion, or meeting is open to the
public;
3.      A vote, an official act, or an agreement regarding an
action at a future meeting does not occur;
4.      A discussion of public business, as those terms are
defined in paragraph (a), does not occur; and
5.      Appropriate records, minutes, audio recordings, or
video recordings are made and retained as a public record.
(d)      A no resolution, rule, or formal action is not shall
be considered binding unless except as taken or made at a public
such meeting. The board or commission must provide reasonable
notice of all such meetings.
Section 2.         This act shall take effect upon becoming a law.