A bill to be entitled                      
An act relating to early childhood education; creating
s. 1002.78, F.S.; requiring schools designated as one
of the 300 lowest-performing elementary schools to
include an Early Childhood Transition Team in their
required school improvement plans; requiring the
principal of each school, in consultation with a local
early learning coalition, to appoint certain members
to the team; requiring the team to develop a
transition plan that contains certain elements;
providing an effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:

Section 1. Section 1002.78, Florida Statutes, is created to
read:
1002.78 Early Childhood Transition Team.—
(1) Each school designated as one of the 300 lowest
performing elementary schools shall include an Early Childhood
Transition Team in its required school improvement plan to
assist the school in implementing activities to improve
students’ transition from prekindergarten to kindergarten.
(2) The principal of each school shall, in consultation
with its local early learning coalition, appoint all of the
following to serve on an Early Childhood Transition Team:
(a) A school-based administrator.
(b) A kindergarten teacher.
(c) The parent of a student in kindergarten.
(d) A representative from a Voluntary Prekindergarten
Program (VPK) provider recommended by the early learning
coalition.
(e) The parent of a child enrolled in VPK.
(f) Other community partners recommended by the early
learning coalition and the school district.
(3) The Early Childhood Transition Team shall develop a
transition plan that includes, at a minimum, all of the
following:
(a) A list of VPK, Head Start, and other early learning
provider programs linked to the public school kindergarten
programs students are likely to attend.
(b) A prekindergarten questionnaire to be completed by a
parent which provides the student’s name, Department of
Education ID, address, parent’s name, contact information, and
the public school kindergarten the child expects to attend. The
providers shall share the list of prospective students with the
receiving public schools by March 1 each year.
(c) A requirement that the public school provide:
1. An opportunity for VPK, Head Start, and other early
learning providers, parents, and children to visit the public
school and meet with kindergarten teachers;
2. An open house for VPK, Head Start, and other early
learning providers, parents, and children to participate in a
public school activity with kindergarten students before the end
of the school year;
3. An early registration process for prekindergarten
students at the school;
4. A welcome packet for parents and incoming kindergarten
students, including learning activities to prepare the students
for kindergarten; and
5. An implementation plan and schedule to share student
data, attendance, assessment results, and records from the VPK,
Head Start, and other early learning provider programs with the
public school.
(d) A plan for professional development which requires all
administrators at public schools with prekindergarten or
kindergarten programs to have certifications in early childhood
education or be engaged in a professional development program,
including a minimum of 15 hours of instruction within the first
year of becoming an elementary administrator. The professional
development instruction must include an emphasis on the social
and emotional needs of children in prekindergarten to grade 3
programs, and on the age-appropriate use of technology,
instructional materials, and learning strategies. The school
district and the local early learning coalition shall annually
provide one joint professional development course for VPK, Head
Start, and other early learning provider teachers and public
school kindergarten teachers. The professional development:
1. May focus on communication strategies between early
learning providers and the public school kindergarten programs;
developmentally appropriate teaching strategies; alignment of
standards for the transition of children from prekindergarten to
kindergarten activities; family and community involvement;
emotional, social, and medical needs of children; attendance;
data sharing; and other topics as determined by the district and
coalition; and
2. Must include a focus on the differentiation of standards
for children 4 years of age and for children in kindergarten.
Section 2. This act shall take effect July 1, 2018.