A bill to be entitled                      
An act relating to students with disabilities in
public schools; amending s. 1003.573, F.S., relating
to the seclusion and restraint of students with
disabilities; defining terms; providing requirements
for the use of restraint; prohibiting specified
physical restraint techniques; providing requirements
for the use of exclusionary and nonexclusionary time;
providing requirements for school districts to report
and publish training procedures; providing for
student-centered followup; providing requirements for
documenting, reporting, and monitoring the use of
restraint and exclusionary or nonexclusionary time;
revising school district policies and procedures
relating to restraint; amending s. 1012.582, F.S.;
requiring continuing education and inservice training
for teaching students with emotional or behavioral
disabilities; conforming provisions to changes made by
the act; providing an effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:

Section 1. Section 1003.573, Florida Statutes, is amended
to read:
1003.573 Seclusion and Use of restraint of and seclusion on
students with disabilities in public schools.—
(1) DEFINITIONS.—As used in this section, the term:
(a) “Department” means the Department of Education.
(b) “Exclusionary time” means the period during which a
student is removed from an event, activity, or instructional
environment to encourage reflection on behavior and allow space
and time for understanding of choices and consequences.
(c) “Imminent risk of serious injury or death” means the
impending risk of a significant injury, such as a laceration,
bone fracture, substantial hematoma, or injury to an internal
organ, or death.
(d) “Medical protective equipment” means health-related
protective devices prescribed by a physician or dentist for use
as student protection in response to an existing medical
condition.
(e) “Nonexclusionary time” means a period during which a
student remains in the event or instructional environment but is
redirected from the activities so that he or she has an
opportunity to reflect on the behavior and is given space and
time for understanding of choices and consequences.
(f) “Restraint” means the use of a mechanical or physical
restraint which may be used only when all other behavioral
strategies and intervention techniques have been exhausted.
1. “Mechanical restraint” means the use of a device that
restricts a student’s freedom of movement. The term includes,
but is not limited to, the use of straps, belts, tie-downs, and
chairs with straps; however, the term does not include the use
of any of the following:
a. Medical protective equipment.
b. Behavioral protective equipment, including helmets,
gloves, wraps, calming blankets, and other devices that are used
temporarily to prevent severe tissue damage caused by behavioral
excesses.
c. Physical equipment or orthopedic appliances, surgical
dressings or bandages, or supportive body bands or other
restraints necessary for ongoing medical treatment in the
educational setting.
d. Devices used to support functional body position or
proper balance, or to prevent a person from falling out of a bed
or a wheelchair, except when such a device is used for a purpose
other than supporting a body position or proper balance, such as
coercion, discipline, convenience, or retaliation, to prevent
imminent risk of serious injury or death of the student or
others, or for any other behavior management reason.
e. Equipment used for safety during transportation, such as
seatbelts or wheelchair tie-downs.
2. “Physical restraint” means the use of manual restraint
techniques that involve significant physical force applied by a
teacher or other staff member to restrict the movement of all or
part of a student’s body.
(g) “Seclusion” means the removal of a student from an
educational environment, involuntarily confining the student in
a room or area, and preventing the student from leaving the area
by locking or artificially blocking the door. The term does not
include exclusionary time.
(h) “Student” means a student with a disability.
(2) PHYSICAL RESTRAINT.—
(a) Physical restraint may be used only when there is an
imminent risk of serious injury or death to the student or
others and only for the period of time necessary to eliminate
such risk.
(b) Notwithstanding the authority provided in s. 1003.32,
physical restraint shall be used only to protect the safety of
students, school personnel, or others and may not be used for
student discipline, to correct student noncompliance, or for the
convenience of school district staff. Physical restraint shall
be used only for the period needed to provide such protection.
(c) The degree of force applied during physical restraint
must be only that degree of force necessary to protect the
student or others from serious injury or death.
(d) School personnel who have received training that is not
associated with their employment with the school district, such
as a former law enforcement officer who is now a teacher, shall
receive training in the specific district-approved techniques
and may not apply techniques or procedures acquired elsewhere.
(e) School personnel may not use any of the following
physical restraint techniques on a student:
1. Pain inducement to obtain compliance.
2. Bone locks.
3. Hyperextension of joints.
4. Peer restraint.
5. Pressure or weight on the chest, lungs, sternum,
diaphragm, back, or abdomen causing chest compression.
6. Straddling or sitting on any part of the body or any
maneuver that places pressure, weight, or leverage on the neck
or throat, on an artery, or on the back of the head or neck or
that otherwise obstructs or restricts the circulation of blood
or obstructs an airway.
7. Any type of choking, including hand chokes, and any type
of neck or head hold.
8. A technique that involves spraying or pushing anything
on or into the mouth, nose, eyes, or any part of the face or
that involves covering the face or body with anything, including
soft objects such as pillows or washcloths.
9. Any maneuver that involves punching, hitting, poking,
pinching, or shoving.
10. Prone or supine restraint.
(3) EXCLUSIONARY AND NONEXCLUSIONARY TIME.—
(a) School personnel may place a student in exclusionary or
nonexclusionary time if all of the following conditions are met:
1. The exclusionary or nonexclusionary time is part of a
positive behavioral intervention plan developed for the student.
2. There is documentation that the exclusionary or
nonexclusionary time was preceded by the use of other positive
behavioral supports that were not effective.
3. The exclusionary or nonexclusionary time takes place in
a classroom or in another environment where class educational
activities are taking place.
4. The student is not physically prevented from leaving the
exclusionary or nonexclusionary time area.
5. The student is observed on a constant basis by an adult
for the duration of the exclusionary or nonexclusionary time.
6. The exclusionary or nonexclusionary time area and
process are free of any action that is likely to embarrass or
humiliate the student.
(b) Exclusionary or nonexclusionary time may not be used
for a period that exceeds 1 minute for each year of a student’s
age or until the student is calm enough to return to his or her
seat.
(c) Exclusionary or nonexclusionary time may not be used as
a punishment or negative consequence of a student’s behavior.
(4) TRAINING.—
(a) Each school district shall report its procedures for
training in the use of restraint to the department by publishing
the procedures in the district’s special policies and procedures
manual.
(b) Training in the use of restraint must include all of
the following:
1. Procedures for deescalating a problem behavior before
the problem behavior increases to a level or intensity
necessitating physical intervention.
2. Information regarding the risks associated with
restraint and procedures for assessing individual situations and
students in order to determine whether the use of restraint is
appropriate and sufficiently safe.
3. The actual use of specific techniques that range from
the least to most restrictive, with ample opportunity for
trainees to demonstrate proficiency in the use of such
techniques.
4. Techniques for implementing restraint with multiple
staff members working as a team.
5. Techniques for assisting a student in reentering the
instructional environment and reengaging in learning.
6. Instruction in the district’s documentation and
reporting requirements.
7. Procedures to identify and deal with possible medical
emergencies arising during the use of restraint.
8. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
(5) STUDENT-CENTERED FOLLOWUP.—If a student is restrained
more than twice during a semester, the school shall conduct a
review of:
(a) The incidents in which restraint was used and an
analysis of how future incidents may be avoided;
(b) The student’s functional behavioral assessment and
positive behavioral intervention plan by the school personnel
and parent within two weeks before the end of the semester; and
(c) The training provided to school personnel concerning
the use of restraint.
(6)(1) DOCUMENTATION AND REPORTING.—
(a) At the beginning of each school year, a school district
shall publicly post its policies on all emergency procedures,
including its policies on the use of restraint.
(b)(a) A school shall prepare an incident report within 24
hours after a student is released from restraint or exclusionary
or nonexclusionary time seclusion. If the student’s release
occurs on a day before the school closes for the weekend, a
holiday, or another reason, the incident report must be
completed by the end of the school day on the day the school
reopens.
(c)(b) The following must be included in the incident
report:
1. The name of the student restrained or placed in
exclusionary or nonexclusionary time secluded.
2. The age, grade, ethnicity, and disability of the student
restrained or placed in exclusionary or nonexclusionary time
secluded.
3. The date and time of the event and the duration of the
restraint or exclusionary or nonexclusionary time seclusion.
4. The location at which the restraint or exclusionary or
nonexclusionary time seclusion occurred.
5. If a restraint is used, a description of the type of
restraint used in terms established by the department of
Education.
6. The name of the person using or assisting in the
restraint of or imposition of exclusionary or nonexclusionary
time on seclusion of the student and the date the person was
last trained in the use of restraint on students.
7. The name of any nonstudent who was present to witness
the restraint or exclusionary or nonexclusionary time seclusion.
8. A description of the incident, including all of the
following:
a. The context in which the restraint or exclusionary or
nonexclusionary time seclusion occurred.
b. The student’s behavior leading up to and precipitating
the decision to use manual or physical restraint or exclusionary
or nonexclusionary time seclusion, including an indication as to
why there was an imminent risk of serious injury or death to the
student or others if a student was subject to restraint.
c. The specific positive behavioral strategies used to
prevent and deescalate the behavior.
d. What occurred with the student immediately after the
termination of the restraint or exclusionary or nonexclusionary
time seclusion.
e. Any injuries, visible marks, or possible medical
emergencies that may have occurred during the restraint or
exclusionary or nonexclusionary time seclusion, documented
according to district policies.
f. Evidence of steps taken to notify the student’s parent
or guardian.
(d)(c) A school shall notify the parent or guardian of a
student each time manual or physical restraint or exclusionary
or nonexclusionary time seclusion is used. Such notification
must be in writing and provided before the end of the school day
on which the restraint or exclusionary or nonexclusionary time
seclusion occurs. Reasonable efforts must also be taken to
notify the parent or guardian by telephone or computer e-mail,
or both, and these efforts must be documented. The school shall
obtain, and keep in its records, the parent’s or guardian’s
signed acknowledgment that he or she was notified of his or her
child’s restraint or exclusionary or nonexclusionary time
seclusion.
(e)(d) A school shall also provide the parent or guardian
with the completed incident report in writing by mail within 3
school days after a student was manually or physically
restrained or placed in exclusionary or nonexclusionary time
secluded. The school shall obtain, and keep in its records, the
parent’s or guardian’s signed acknowledgment that he or she
received a copy of the incident report.
(7)(2) MONITORING.—
(a) Monitoring of The use of manual or physical restraint
or exclusionary or nonexclusionary time seclusion on students
shall be monitored occur at the classroom, building, district,
and state levels.
(b) Any documentation prepared by a school pursuant to as
required in subsection (6) (1) shall be provided to the school
principal, the district director of Exceptional Student
Education, and the bureau chief of the Bureau of Exceptional
Education and Student Services electronically each month that
the school is in session. Redacted copies of such documentation
must be updated monthly and made available to the public through
the department’s website no later than October 1, 2018.
(c) The department shall maintain aggregate data of
incidents of manual or physical restraint or exclusionary or
nonexclusionary time and seclusion and disaggregate the data for
analysis by county, school, student exceptionality, and other
variables, including the type and method of restraint or
exclusionary or nonexclusionary time seclusion used. This
information must shall be updated monthly and made available to
the public through the department’s website beginning no later
than October 1, 2018.
(d) The department shall establish and provide to school
districts standards for documenting, reporting, and monitoring
the use of manual or physical restraint or mechanical restraint,
and occurrences of exclusionary or nonexclusionary time
seclusion. These standards shall be provided to school districts
by October 1, 2011.
(8)(3) SCHOOL DISTRICT POLICIES AND PROCEDURES REGARDING
RESTRAINT.—
(a) School districts shall develop policies and procedures
that provide for the physical safety and security of all
students and school personnel and which treat all students with
respect and dignity in an environment that promotes a positive
school culture and climate. Such Each school district shall
develop policies and procedures must be that are consistent with
this section and must that govern the following:
1. A description of escalating behavioral strategies that
may be used.
2. Allowable use of restraint on students.
3. Training procedures.
4.1. Incident-reporting procedures.
5.2. Data collection and monitoring, including when, where,
and why students are restrained and or secluded; the frequency
of occurrences of such restraint or seclusion; and the prone or
mechanical restraint that is most used.
6.3. Monitoring and reporting of data collected.
7.4. Training programs and procedures relating to manual or
physical restraint and seclusion.
8.5. The district’s plan for selecting personnel to be
trained and the timeframe for completing such training pursuant
to subsection (4).
9.6. The district’s plan for reducing the use of restraint,
and seclusion particularly in settings in which it occurs
frequently or with students who are restrained repeatedly, and
for reducing the use of prone restraint and mechanical
restraint. The plan must include a goal for reducing the use of
restraint and seclusion and must include activities, skills, and
resources needed to achieve that goal. Activities may include,
but are not limited to, all of the following:
a. Additional training in positive behavioral support and
crisis management.;
b. Parental involvement.;
c. Data review.;
d. Updates of students’ functional behavioral analysis and
positive behavior intervention plans.;
e. Additional student evaluations.;
f. Debriefing with staff.;
g. Use of schoolwide positive behavior support.; and
h. Changes to the school environment.
10. Analysis of data to determine trends.
11. Ongoing reduction of the use of restraint.
(b) Any revisions a school district makes to its to the
district’s policies and procedures, which must be prepared as
part of the school district’s its special policies and
procedures, must be filed with the bureau chief of the Bureau of
Exceptional Education and Student Services no later than January
31, 2012.
(9)(4) PROHIBITED RESTRAINT.—School personnel may not use a
mechanical restraint or a manual or physical restraint that
restricts a student’s breathing.
(10)(5) SECLUSION.—School personnel may not place a student
in seclusion close, lock, or physically block a student in a
room that is unlit and does not meet the rules of the State Fire
Marshal for seclusion time-out rooms.
Section 2. Subsections (1) and (2) of section 1012.582,
Florida Statutes, are amended to read:
1012.582 Continuing education and inservice training for
teaching students with developmental and emotional or behavioral
disabilities.—
(1) The Commissioner of Education shall develop
recommendations to incorporate instruction regarding autism
spectrum disorder, Down syndrome, and other developmental
disabilities, and emotional or behavioral disabilities into
continuing education or inservice training requirements for
instructional personnel. These recommendations shall address:
(a) Early identification of, and intervention for, students
who have autism spectrum disorder, Down syndrome, or other
developmental disabilities, or emotional or behavioral
disabilities.
(b) Curriculum planning and curricular and instructional
modifications, adaptations, and specialized strategies and
techniques.
(c) The use of available state and local resources.
(d) The use of positive behavioral supports to deescalate
problem behaviors.
(e) Appropriate use of manual physical restraint and
effective classroom behavior management strategies, including,
but not limited to, differential reinforcement, precision
commands, minimizing attention or access to other reinforcers,
and exclusionary and nonexclusionary time methods seclusion
techniques.
(2) In developing the recommendations, the commissioner
shall consult with the State Surgeon General, the Director of
the Agency for Persons with Disabilities, representatives from
the education community in the state, and representatives from
entities that promote awareness about autism spectrum disorder,
Down syndrome, and other developmental disabilities, and
emotional or behavioral disabilities and provide programs and
services to persons with developmental disabilities, including,
but not limited to, regional autism centers pursuant to s.
1004.55.
Section 3. This act shall take effect July 1, 2018.