A bill to be entitled                      
An act relating to public meetings; reenacting and
amending s. 286.011, F.S., relating to public
meetings; specifying that a board or commission of any
entity created by general or special law is subject to
public meetings requirements; specifying that a
board’s or commission’s adoption of an ordinance or a
code is not binding unless public meetings
requirements are met; revising notice requirements
applicable to public meetings of a board or
commission; providing that a member of the public has
the right to speak at a public meeting of a board or
commission; specifying circumstances under which a
board or commission is not required to allow public
comment or may restrict the length of time that a
member of the public may speak; requiring members of a
board or commission to respond to questions made at
public meetings within a specified timeframe;
requiring a board or commission to prescribe a form on
which members of the public wishing to exercise their
right to speak must provide certain information;
providing civil and criminal penalties for violations
of the act; conforming provisions to changes made by
the act; repealing s. 286.0114, F.S., relating to the
reasonable opportunity to be heard at public meetings;
providing a declaration of important state interest;
providing an effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:

Section 1. Section 286.011, Florida Statutes, is reenacted
and amended to read:
286.011 Public meetings and records; public inspection;
criminal and civil penalties.—
(1) Except as otherwise provided in the State Constitution,
all meetings of any board or commission of any state agency or
authority; or of any agency or authority of any county,
municipal corporation, or political subdivision; or of any
entity created by general or special law, except as otherwise
provided in the Constitution, including meetings with or
attended by any person elected to such board or commission, but
who has not yet taken office, at which official acts are to be
taken are declared to be public meetings open to the public for
public attendance and participation at all times. The adoption
of a, and no resolution, rule, ordinance, or code, or other
formal action taken, is not shall be considered binding except
as taken or made at such meeting.
(a) The board or commission must provide at least 3 days’
advance reasonable notice of all such meetings, and such notice
must include publication of all agenda items and any materials
or attachments that will be distributed at the meeting. The
board or commission may schedule an emergency meeting if 24
hours’ advance notice is provided. If necessary, the board or
commission may amend a meeting agenda after its initial
publication. On the day of a meeting, the board or commission
shall maintain at least two copies of the agenda, and any
materials or attachments to be distributed at the meeting, at
the meeting location.
(b) A member of the public has the right to speak for at
least 3 minutes at a meeting and may address:
1. A pending agenda item that relates to the appointment of
public officers; zoning or land use regulation; the imposition
of taxes, fees, and fines; or other interests affecting the
rights of residents and businesses within the jurisdiction of
the board or commission; or
2. Any matter that is not a specific agenda item but within
the purview of the jurisdiction of the board or commission. The
presiding officer or chair shall allot time for general public
comment as either the first or last item listed on the agenda.
(c) The board or commission is not required to allow public
comment on items on a consent agenda; the approval of minutes;
the presentation of awards, proclamations, and reports;
announcements; solely administrative or ministerial matters; or
an official act taken to deal with an emergency situation
affecting the public health, welfare, and safety.
(d) Notwithstanding paragraph (b), the presiding officer or
chair may allow a representative of a group supporting or
opposing an agenda item to speak in lieu of individuals speaking
on the same item. If 20 or more members of the public request to
speak on one item, the presiding officer or chair may further
restrict the amount of time allotted for each speaker to address
the board or commission but must allow each speaker to speak for
at least 1 minute.
(e) The board or commission shall respond, either publicly
at the meeting or through written correspondence, to any
question made by a member of the public. Any written response
must be made within 10 days after the meeting and incorporated
into the minutes of the meeting.
(f) The board or commission shall prescribe a form upon
which a member of the public requesting to speak at a meeting
shall complete to provide his or her name and the agenda item or
other matter that he or she wishes to comment on.
(g) This subsection does not prohibit a board or commission
from maintaining orderly conduct or proper decorum in a public
meeting.
(2) The minutes of a meeting of any such board or
commission of any such state agency or authority shall be
promptly recorded, and such records must shall be open to public
inspection. A The circuit court has courts of this state shall
have jurisdiction to issue injunctions to enforce the purposes
of this section upon application by a resident any citizen of
this state.
(3)(a) Any public officer who violates any provision of
this section commits is guilty of a noncriminal infraction,
punishable by fine not exceeding $500.
(b) Any person who is a member of a board or commission or
of any state agency or authority; of any agency or authority of
any county, municipal corporation, or political subdivision; or
of any entity created by general or special law who knowingly
violates the provisions of this section by attending a meeting
not held in accordance with this section commits the provisions
hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree,
punishable as provided in s. 775.082 or s. 775.083.
(c) Conduct that which occurs outside the state and that
which would constitute a knowing violation of this section is a
misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in s.
775.082 or s. 775.083.
(4) Whenever an action has been filed against any board or
commission of any state agency or authority; of or any agency or
authority of any county, municipal corporation, or political
subdivision; or of any entity created by general or special law
to enforce the provisions of this section or to invalidate the
actions of any such board or, commission, agency, or authority,
which action was taken in violation of this section, if and the
court determines that the defendant or defendants to such action
acted in violation of this section, the court shall assess a
reasonable attorney attorney’s fee against such agency,
authority, or entity; however, the court and may assess a
reasonable attorney attorney’s fee against the individual filing
such an action if the court finds it was filed in bad faith or
was frivolous. Any fees so assessed may be assessed against the
individual member or members of such board or commission; except
provided, that in any case where the board or commission seeks
the advice of its attorney and such advice is followed, attorney
no such fees may not shall be assessed against the individual
member or members of the board or commission. However, This
subsection does shall not apply to a state attorney or his or
her duly authorized assistants or any officer charged with
enforcing the provisions of this section.
(5) Whenever any board or commission of any state agency or
authority; of or any agency or authority of any county,
municipal corporation, or political subdivision; or of any
entity created by general or special law appeals any court order
that which has found the said board or, commission, agency, or
authority to have violated this section, and such order is
affirmed, the court shall assess a reasonable attorney
attorney’s fee for the appeal against the such board or,
commission of such, agency, or authority, or entity. Any fees so
assessed may be assessed against the individual member or
members of such board or commission; except provided, that in
any case where the board or commission seeks the advice of its
attorney and such advice is followed, attorney no such fees may
not shall be assessed against the individual member or members
of the board or commission.
(6) All persons subject to subsection (1) are prohibited
from holding meetings at any facility or location that which
discriminates on the basis of sex, age, race, creed, color,
origin, or economic status or that which operates in such a
manner as to unreasonably restrict public access to such a
facility.
(7) Whenever any member of any board or commission of any
state agency or authority; of or any agency or authority of any
county, municipal corporation, or political subdivision; or of
any entity created by general or special law is charged with a
violation of this section and is subsequently acquitted, the
board or commission is authorized to reimburse the said member
for any portion of his or her reasonable attorney attorney’s
fees.
(8) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1), any
board or commission of any state agency or authority; of or any
agency or authority of any county, municipal corporation, or
political subdivision; or of any entity created by general or
special law, and the chief administrative or executive officer
of such the governmental entity, may meet in private with the
entity’s attorney to discuss pending litigation to which the
entity is presently a party before a court or administrative
agency, if provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) The entity’s attorney shall advise the entity at a
public meeting that he or she desires advice concerning the
litigation.
(b) The subject matter of the meeting is shall be confined
to settlement negotiations or strategy sessions related to
litigation expenditures.
(c) The entire session is shall be recorded by a certified
court reporter. The reporter shall record the times of
commencement and termination of the session, all discussion and
proceedings, the names of all persons present at any time, and
the names of all persons speaking. No portion of the session may
shall be held off the record. The court reporter’s notes must
shall be fully transcribed and filed with the entity’s clerk
within a reasonable time after the meeting.
(d) The entity shall give reasonable public notice of the
time and date of the attorney-client session and the names of
persons who will be attending the session. The session shall
commence at an open meeting at which the persons chairing the
meeting shall announce the commencement and estimated length of
the attorney-client session and the names of the persons
attending. At the conclusion of the attorney-client session, the
meeting must shall be reopened, and the person chairing the
meeting shall announce the termination of the session.
(e) The transcript shall be made part of the public record
upon conclusion of the litigation.
Section 2. Section 286.0114, Florida Statutes, is repealed.
Section 3. The Legislature finds that a proper and
legitimate state purpose is served when members of the public
are afforded the right to speak at public meetings before a
board or commission of a state agency or authority; of the
agency or authority of a county, municipal corporation, or
political subdivision; or of any entity created by general or
special law. Therefore, the Legislature determines and declares
that this act fulfills an important state interest.
Section 4. This act shall take effect July 1, 2018.