A bill to be entitled
An act relating to local government ethics reform;
amending s. 112.313, F.S.; providing that contractual
relationships held by business entities are deemed
held by public officers or employees in certain
situations; amending s. 112.3142, F.S.; requiring
certain ethics training for governing board members of
special districts and water management districts;
authorizing certain continuing education to satisfy
the ethics training requirement; deleting a
requirement that the Commission on Ethics adopt
certain rules relating to ethics training class course
content; providing course content requirements;
encouraging training providers to seek accreditation;
amending s. 112.3143, F.S.; prohibiting governing
board members of special districts or school districts
from voting in an official capacity on specified
matters; prohibiting county, municipal, or other local
public officers or governing board members of special
districts or school districts from participating in
specified matters; amending s. 112.3144, F.S.;
requiring certain mayors and members of a municipality
governing body to file a full and public disclosure of
financial interests; providing disclosure
requirements; amending s. 112.3145, F.S.; providing
disclosure requirements; providing applicability;
amending s. 112.31455, F.S.; applying provisions
relating to collecting unpaid fines for failing to
file such disclosures to school districts; amending s.
112.3148, F.S.; conforming provisions to specified
local government lobbyist registration requirements
effective October 1, 2019; providing for the future
removal of local government authority to enact a rule
or ordinance requiring lobbyists to register with the
local government; providing for the future repeal of
s. 112.3261, F.S., relating to registration and
reporting for lobbying water management districts;
creating s. 112.3262, F.S.; providing definitions;
requiring the commission to create the Local
Government Lobbyist Registration System; requiring
lobbyists to register with the commission before
lobbying governmental entities effective a specified
date; providing registration requirements and fees;
providing responsibilities of the lobbyist,
governmental entity, commission, and Governor;
providing civil penalties; authorizing the suspension
of certain lobbyists; authorizing the commission to
adopt rules; requiring the commission to provide
advisory opinions for specified purposes; amending s.
218.32, F.S.; requiring the Department of Financial
Services to file an annual report with the Legislature
and commission by a specified date; declaring that the
act fulfills an important state interest; providing
effective dates.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:
Section 1.       Subsection (7) of section 112.313, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
112.313     Standards of conduct for public officers,
employees of agencies, and local government attorneys.--
(7)     CONFLICTING EMPLOYMENT OR CONTRACTUAL RELATIONSHIP.--
(a)     A No public officer or employee of an agency may not
shall have or hold any employment or contractual relationship
with any business entity or any agency that which is subject to
the regulation of, or is doing business with, an agency of which
he or she is an officer or employee, excluding those
organizations and their officers who, when acting in their
official capacity, enter into or negotiate a collective
bargaining contract with the state or any municipality, county,
or other political subdivision of the state; and nor shall an
officer or employee of an agency may not have or hold any
employment or contractual relationship that will create a
continuing or frequently recurring conflict between his or her
private interests and the performance of his or her public
duties or that would impede the full and faithful discharge of
his or her public duties. For purposes of this subsection, if a
public officer or employee of an agency holds a material
interest in a business entity other than a publicly traded
entity, or is an officer, director, or member who manages such
an entity, contractual relationships held by the business entity
are deemed to be held by the public officer or employee.
1.      When the agency referred to is a that certain kind of
special tax district created by general or special law and is
limited specifically to constructing, maintaining, managing, and
financing improvements in the land area over which the agency
has jurisdiction, or when the agency has been organized pursuant
to chapter 298, then employment with, or entering into a
contractual relationship with, such a business entity by a
public officer or employee of such an agency is shall not be
prohibited by this subsection or be deemed a conflict per se.
However, conduct by such officer or employee that is prohibited
by, or otherwise frustrates the intent of, this section must
shall be deemed a conflict of interest in violation of the
standards of conduct set forth by this section.
2.      When the agency referred to is a legislative body and
the regulatory power over the business entity resides in another
agency, or when the regulatory power that which the legislative
body exercises over the business entity or agency is strictly
through the enactment of laws or ordinances, then employment or
a contractual relationship with such a business entity by a
public officer or employee of a legislative body is shall not be
prohibited by this subsection or be deemed a conflict.
(b)     This subsection does shall not prohibit a public
officer or employee from practicing in a particular profession
or occupation when such practice by persons holding such public
office or employment is required or permitted by law or
ordinance.
Section 2.        Subsection (2) of section 112.3142, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
112.3142        Ethics training for specified constitutional
officers, and elected municipal officers, and members of a
governing board of a special district or water management
district.--
(2)(a)      All constitutional officers must complete 4 hours
of ethics training each calendar year which addresses, at a
minimum, s. 8, Art. II of the State Constitution, the Code of
Ethics for Public Officers and Employees, and the public records
and public meetings laws of this state. This requirement may be
satisfied by completion of a continuing legal education class or
other continuing professional education class, seminar, or
presentation if the required subjects are covered.
(b)     Beginning January 1, 2015, All elected municipal
officers must complete 4 hours of ethics training each calendar
year which addresses, at a minimum, s. 8, Art. II of the State
Constitution, the Code of Ethics for Public Officers and
Employees, and the public records and public meetings laws of
this state. This requirement may be satisfied by completion of a
continuing legal education class or other continuing
professional education class, seminar, or presentation if the
required subjects are covered.
(c)      Beginning January 1, 2019, all members of the
governing board of a special district or water management
district must complete 4 hours of ethics training each calendar
year which addresses, at a minimum, s. 8, Art. II of the State
Constitution, the Code of Ethics for Public Officers and
Employees, and the public records and public meetings laws of
this state.
(d)      The requirements specified in paragraphs (a), (b), and
(c) may be satisfied by completion of a continuing legal
education class or other continuing professional education
class, seminar, or presentation if the required subjects are
covered.
(e)      The commission shall adopt rules establishing minimum
Course content for the portion of an ethics training class which
addresses s. 8, Art. II of the State Constitution and the Code
of Ethics for Public Officers and Employees must include one or
more of the following:
1.      Doing business with one's own agency;
2.      Conflicting employment or contractual relationships;
3.      Misuse of position;
4.      Disclosure or use of certain information;
5.      Gifts and honoraria, including solicitation and
acceptance of gifts, and unauthorized compensation;
6.      Post-officeholding restrictions;
7.      Restrictions on the employment of relatives;
8.      Voting conflicts if the officer is a member of a
collegial body and votes in his or her official capacity;
9.      Financial disclosure requirements, including the
automatic fine and appeal process;
10. Commission procedures on ethics complaints and
referrals; and
11.      The importance of and the process for obtaining
advisory opinions rendered by the commission.
(f)      Training providers are encouraged to seek
accreditation from any applicable licensing body for courses
offered pursuant to this subsection.
(g)(d)      The Legislature intends that a constitutional
officer, or elected municipal officer, or member of the
governing board of a special district or water management
district who is required to complete ethics training pursuant to
this section receive the required training as close as possible
to the date that he or she assumes office. A constitutional
officer, or elected municipal officer, or member of the
governing board of a special district or water management
district assuming a new office or new term of office on or
before March 31 must complete the annual training on or before
December 31 of the year in which the term of office began. A
constitutional officer, or elected municipal officer, or member
of the governing board of a special district or water management
district assuming a new office or new term of office after March
31 is not required to complete ethics training for the calendar
year in which the term of office began.
Section 3.        Subsections (3) and (4) of section 112.3143,
Florida Statutes, are amended to read:
112.3143        Voting conflicts.--
(3)(a)      A No county, municipal, or other local public
officer or governing board member of a special district or
school district may not shall vote in an official capacity upon
any measure which would inure to his or her special private gain
or loss; which he or she knows would inure to the special
private gain or loss of any principal by whom he or she is
retained or to the parent organization or subsidiary of a
corporate principal by which he or she is retained, other than
an agency as defined in s. 112.312(2); or which he or she knows
would inure to the special private gain or loss of a relative or
business associate of the public officer or board member. Such
public officer or board member shall, prior to the vote being
taken, publicly state to the assembly the nature of the
officer's or member's interest in the matter from which he or
she is abstaining from voting and, within 15 days after the vote
occurs, disclose the nature of his or her interest as a public
record in a memorandum filed with the person responsible for
recording the minutes of the meeting, who shall incorporate the
memorandum in the minutes.
(b)     However, a commissioner of a community redevelopment
agency created or designated pursuant to s. 163.356 or s.
163.357, or an officer of an independent special tax district
elected on a one-acre, one-vote basis, is not prohibited from
voting, when voting in said capacity.
(4)     A county, municipal, or other local public officer;
governing board member of a special district or school district;
or No appointed public officer may not shall participate in any
matter which would inure to the officer's or member's special
private gain or loss; which the officer or member knows would
inure to the special private gain or loss of any principal by
whom he or she is retained or to the parent organization or
subsidiary of a corporate principal by which he or she is
retained; or which he or she knows would inure to the special
private gain or loss of a relative or business associate of the
public officer or board member, without first disclosing the
nature of his or her interest in the matter.
(a)     Such disclosure, indicating the nature of the
conflict, shall be made in a written memorandum filed with the
person responsible for recording the minutes of the meeting,
prior to the meeting in which consideration of the matter will
take place, and shall be incorporated into the minutes. Any such
memorandum shall become a public record upon filing, shall
immediately be provided to the other members of the agency, and
shall be read publicly at the next meeting held subsequent to
the filing of this written memorandum.
(b)     In the event that disclosure has not been made prior
to the meeting or that any conflict is unknown prior to the
meeting, the disclosure shall be made orally at the meeting when
it becomes known that a conflict exists. A written memorandum
disclosing the nature of the conflict shall then be filed within
15 days after the oral disclosure with the person responsible
for recording the minutes of the meeting and shall be
incorporated into the minutes of the meeting at which the oral
disclosure was made. Any such memorandum shall become a public
record upon filing, shall immediately be provided to the other
members of the agency, and shall be read publicly at the next
meeting held subsequent to the filing of this written
memorandum.
(c)     For purposes of this subsection, the term
"participate" means any attempt to influence the decision by
oral or written communication, whether made by the officer or
member or at the officer's or member's direction.
Section 4.       Subsections (1) and (2) and paragraph (c) of
subsection (8) of section 112.3144, Florida Statutes, are
amended to read:
112.3144        Full and public disclosure of financial
interests.--
(1)(a)      An officer or member who is required by s. 8, Art.
II of the State Constitution to file a full and public
disclosure of his or her financial interests for any calendar or
fiscal year shall file that disclosure with the Florida
Commission on Ethics. Additionally, beginning January 1, 2015,
an officer who is required to complete annual ethics training
pursuant to s. 112.3142 must certify on his or her full and
public disclosure of financial interests that he or she has
completed the required training.
(b)     Each elected mayor and member of the governing body of
a municipality that had $10 million or more in total revenue for
the 3 consecutive fiscal years ending prior to the year the
disclosure covers shall file a full and public disclosure of
financial interests with the Commission on Ethics. Each elected
mayor and member of the governing body of such municipality
shall continue to file a full and public disclosure until the
municipality has less than $10 million in total revenue for 3
consecutive fiscal years. For purposes of this paragraph, the
verified report that the Department of Financial Services files
with the Commission on Ethics in accordance with s. 218.32(3)
shall be the sole basis for determining whether a municipality
has $10 million or more in total revenue, except that a
municipality that has not had its annual financial report
certified in accordance with s. 218.32 on or before November 30
of the year in which it is due shall be considered to have $10
million or more in total revenue for such year. If an
uncertified report is subsequently certified by the Department
of Financial Services, the certified report shall be used in any
disclosure period beginning after the report is certified.
(c)     An officer or member who is required to complete
annual ethics training pursuant to s. 112.3142 must certify on
his or her full and public disclosure of financial interests
that he or she has completed the required training.
Additionally, beginning January 1, 2019, an officer or member
who is required to complete annual ethics training pursuant to
s. 112.3142 must provide the name of the training provider on
his or her full and public disclosure of financial interests.
(2)     An officer or member a person who is required,
pursuant to s. 8, Art. II of the State Constitution, to file a
full and public disclosure of financial interests and who has
filed a full and public disclosure of financial interests for
any calendar or fiscal year is shall not be required to file a
statement of financial interests pursuant to s. 112.3145(2) and
(3) for the same year or for any part thereof notwithstanding
any requirement of this part. If an incumbent in an elective
office has filed the full and public disclosure of financial
interests to qualify for election to the same office or if a
candidate for office holds another office subject to the annual
filing requirement, the qualifying officer shall forward an
electronic copy of the full and public disclosure of financial
interests to the commission no later than July 1. The electronic
copy of the full and public disclosure of financial interests
satisfies the annual disclosure requirement of this section. A
candidate who does not qualify until after the annual full and
public disclosure of financial interests has been filed pursuant
to this section shall file a copy of his or her disclosure with
the officer before whom he or she qualifies.
(8)
(c)     For purposes of this section, an error or omission is
immaterial, inconsequential, or de minimis if the original
filing provided sufficient information for the public to
identify potential conflicts of interest. However, failure to
certify completion of annual ethics training required under s.
112.3142 or provide the name of the training provider does not
constitute an immaterial, inconsequential, or de minimis error
or omission.
Section 5.        Subsection (4) and paragraph (c) of subsection
(10) of section 112.3145, Florida Statutes, are amended to read:
112.3145        Disclosure of financial interests and clients
represented before agencies.--
(4)     Beginning January 1, 2015, An officer who is required
to complete annual ethics training pursuant to s. 112.3142 must
certify on his or her statement of financial interests that he
or she has completed the required training. Beginning January 1,
2019, an officer or member who is required to complete annual
ethics training pursuant to s. 112.3142 must provide the name of
the training provider on his or her statement of financial
interests.
(10)
(c)     For purposes of this section, an error or omission is
immaterial, inconsequential, or de minimis if the original
filing provided sufficient information for the public to
identify potential conflicts of interest. However, failure to
certify completion of annual ethics training required under s.
112.3142 or provide the name of the training provider does not
constitute an immaterial, inconsequential, or de minimis error
or omission.
Section 6.       The amendments made by this act to ss. 112.3144
and 112.3145, Florida Statutes, apply to disclosures filed for
the 2018 calendar year and all subsequent calendar years.
Section 7.       Subsection (1) of section 112.31455, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
112.31455       Collection methods for unpaid automatic fines
for failure to timely file disclosure of financial interests.--
(1)     Before referring any unpaid fine accrued pursuant to
s. 112.3144(5) or s. 112.3145(7) to the Department of Financial
Services, the commission shall attempt to determine whether the
individual owing such a fine is a current public officer or
current public employee. If so, the commission may notify the
Chief Financial Officer or the governing body of the appropriate
county, municipality, school district, or special district of
the total amount of any fine owed to the commission by such
individual.
(a)     After receipt and verification of the notice from the
commission, the Chief Financial Officer or the governing body of
the county, municipality, school district, or special district
shall begin withholding the lesser of 10 percent or the maximum
amount allowed under federal law from any salary-related
payment. The withheld payments shall be remitted to the
commission until the fine is satisfied.
(b)     The Chief Financial Officer or the governing body of
the county, municipality, school district, or special district
may retain an amount of each withheld payment, as provided in s.
77.0305, to cover the administrative costs incurred under this
section.
Section 8.        Effective October 1, 2019, paragraph (b) of
subsection (2) of section 112.3148, Florida Statutes, is amended
to read:
112.3148        Reporting and prohibited receipt of gifts by
individuals filing full or limited public disclosure of
financial interests and by procurement employees.--
(2)     As used in this section:
(b)1.       "Lobbyist" means any natural person who, for
compensation, seeks, or sought during the preceding 12 months,
to influence the governmental decisionmaking of a reporting
individual or procurement employee or his or her agency or
seeks, or sought during the preceding 12 months, to encourage
the passage, defeat, or modification of any proposal or
recommendation by the reporting individual or procurement
employee or his or her agency.
2.      With respect to an agency that is a governmental entity
as defined in s. 112.3262 has established by rule, ordinance, or
law a registration process for persons seeking to influence
decisionmaking or to encourage the passage, defeat, or
modification of any proposal or recommendation by such agency or
an employee or official of the agency, the term "lobbyist"
includes only a person who is required to be registered as a
lobbyist in accordance with s. 112.3262 such rule, ordinance, or
law or who was during the preceding 12 months required to be
registered as a lobbyist in accordance with s. 112.3262 such
rule, ordinance, or law. At a minimum, such a registration
system must require the registration of, or must designate,
persons as "lobbyists" who engage in the same activities as
require registration to lobby the Legislature pursuant to s.
11.045.
Section 9.       Effective October 1, 2019, section 112.3261,
Florida Statutes, is repealed.
Section 10.          Section 112.3262, Florida Statutes, is created
to read:
112.3262        Lobbying before governmental entities.--
(1)     As used in this section, the term:
(a)     "Governmental entity" or "entity" means a water
management district created in s. 373.069 and operating under
the authority of chapter 373, hospital district, children's
services district, expressway authority as the term "authority"
is defined in s. 348.0002, port authority as defined in s.
315.02, county, municipality, school district, or special
district.
(b)     "Lobbying" means seeking, on behalf of another person,
to influence a governmental entity with respect to a decision of
the entity in an area of policy or procurement or an attempt to
obtain the goodwill of an official or employee of a governmental
entity. The term does not include representing a client in any
stage of applying for or seeking approval of an application for
a license, permit, or waiver of a regulation or other
administrative action, or opposition to such action, provided
such action does not require legislative discretion and is
subject to judicial review by petitioning for writ of
certiorari.
(c)     "Lobbyist" means a person who is employed and receives
payment, or who contracts for economic consideration, for the
purpose of lobbying, or a person who is principally employed for
governmental affairs by another person or governmental entity to
lobby on behalf of such person or governmental entity. The term
does not include a person who:
1.      Represents a client in a judicial proceeding or in a
formal administrative proceeding before a governmental entity.
2.      Is an officer or employee of an agency acting in the
normal course of his or her duties.
3.      Consults under contract with the governmental entity
and communicates with the entity's governing body or governing
body employee regarding issues related to the scope of services
in his or her contract.
4.      Is an employee, officer, or board member of a
homeowners' association, condominium association, or
neighborhood association when addressing, in his or her capacity
as an employee, officer, or board member of such association, an
issue impacting the association or its members.
5.      Is a confidential informant who is providing, or wishes
to provide, confidential information to be used for law
enforcement purposes.
6.      Is an expert witness who is retained or employed by an
employer, principal, or client to provide only scientific,
technical, or other specialized information provided in agenda
materials or testimony only in public hearings, provided the
expert identifies such employer, principal, or client at such
hearing.
7.      Seeks to procure a contract which is less than $20,000
or a contract pursuant s. 287.056.
(d)     "Principal" has the same meaning as in s. 112.3215.
(e)     "Principally employed for governmental affairs" means
that one of the employee's principal or most significant
responsibilities to the employer is overseeing the employer's
various governmental relationships or representing the employer
in its contacts made with an officer or employee of a
governmental entity.
(2)     The Commission on Ethics shall create the Local
Government Lobbyist Registration System to register lobbyists
who wish to lobby governmental entities in accordance with this
section. Beginning October 1, 2019, any governmental entity rule
or ordinance that requires lobbyist registration is preempted
and replaced by the registration system established by this
subsection. However, in accordance with s. 112.326, a
governmental entity may adopt a rule or ordinance to regulate
lobbyist conduct and may require compensation reporting,
disclosure of contacts made with an officer or employee of a
governmental entity, or any other activity related to lobbyist
conduct, other than registration. A governmental entity may not
charge a fee for registration of lobbyists and principals, and a
fee may not be charged in the enforcement of lobbyist regulation
except as may be reasonable and necessary to cover the cost of
such enforcement.
(3)     Beginning October 1, 2019, a person may not lobby a
governmental entity until such person has electronically
registered as a lobbyist with the commission. Such initial
registration shall be due upon being retained to lobby and is
renewable annually on the anniversary of the lobbyist's
registration or in the month of the lobbyist's birth as selected
by the lobbyist at the time of registration. The commission
shall request authorization from the principal using the
principal's name, business address, e-mail address, and
telephone number to confirm that the registrant is authorized to
represent the principal. The principal or principal's
representative shall identify and designate its main business
pursuant to the North American Industry Classification System
(NAICS) six digit numerical code that most accurately describes
its main business. Registration is incomplete until the
commission receives the principal's authorization and the
lobbyist's registration fee. Any changes to the information
required by this subsection must be disclosed within 15 days by
the lobbyist updating his or her registration. The commission
may require separate registration submissions for each county
and multi-county governmental entity, but each submission may
include, without an additional fee, any governmental entity in
the county for which the submission is made. A person required
to register as a lobbyist under this subsection must register
through the electronic system and must attest to the following:
(a)     Full legal name, birth month, e-mail address,
telephone number, and business address.
(b)     Name, e-mail address, telephone number, and business
address of each principal.
(c)     Name of each governmental entity lobbied or intended
to be lobbied on behalf of the principal.
(d)     Any direct or indirect business association,
partnership, or financial relationship with an official or
employee of a governmental entity lobbied or intended to be
lobbied on behalf of the principal.
(4)     The annual lobbyist registration fee shall be
established by commission rule but shall not exceed $20 for each
principal represented for one county and governmental entities
therein or one multi-county governmental entity and shall not
exceed $5 for each additional county and governmental entities
therein or additional multi-county governmental entities.
(5)     The commission shall publish a lobbyist directory of
all lobbyist registrations on the Internet.
(6)     A lobbyist shall promptly provide a written statement
to the commission canceling the designation of a principal in
his or her registration upon termination of such representation.
The commission may cancel a lobbyist's designation of a
principal upon the principal's notification that the lobbyist is
no longer authorized to represent such principal.
(7)     A governmental entity must use reasonable efforts to
ascertain whether a lobbyist has registered pursuant to this
section. A governmental entity may not knowingly authorize an
unregistered lobbyist to lobby the entity.
(8)(a)      Except as provided in subsection (9), the
commission shall investigate every sworn complaint that is filed
with it alleging that a person covered by this section has
failed to register or has knowingly submitted false information
in any registration required in this section.
(b)     If the commission finds no probable cause to believe
that a violation of this section occurred, it shall dismiss the
complaint and send a copy of the complaint, findings, and
summary to the complainant and the alleged violator. If the
commission finds probable cause to believe that a violation of
this section occurred, it shall report the results of its
investigation to the Governor and send, by certified mail, a
copy of the report to the alleged violator. Upon request
submitted to the Governor in writing, a person whom the
commission finds probable cause to believe has violated this
section shall be entitled to a public hearing. Such person shall
be deemed to have waived the right to a public hearing if the
request is not received within 14 days after a copy of the
report is mailed. However, the Governor may require a public
hearing and may conduct such further investigation as he or she
deems necessary.
(c)     If the Governor finds that a violation occurred, he or
she may reprimand the violator, censure the violator, or asses a
civil penalty against the violator in accordance with this
section.
(d)      Upon discovery of a violation of this section, a
person or governmental entity may file a sworn complaint with
the commission.
(9)(a)      Upon a first complaint to the commission alleging a
violation of subsection (3) against a lobbyist, or upon any
complaint against a lobbyist received before January 1, 2020,
the commission shall, within 30 days after receipt of the
complaint, issue a warning letter to the lobbyist directing him
or her to consult the obligations of lobbyists under this
section and dismiss the complaint.
(b)      On or after January 1, 2020, notwithstanding the civil
penalties in s. 112.317, a lobbyist found by the commission to
have violated subsection (3) is subject to:
1.      For a first violation, a civil penalty not to exceed
$500.
2.      For a second or subsequent violation committed within
12 months after the Governor determines that a first violation
has been committed, a civil penalty of at least $200 but not
more than $1000 or a 1-year suspension from lobbying any
governmental entity associated with the violation. A
governmental entity may impose additional civil penalties not to
exceed $500 per violation, and, notwithstanding paragraph (c),
may suspend the lobbyist from lobbying the governmental entity
and its agencies on behalf of any principal for up to 2 years.
(c)     The civil penalties and suspensions provided in this
subsection shall be applied on a per principal basis with
suspensions affecting only those principals for whom
unregistered lobbying occurred.
(10)        By January 1, 2019, a governmental entity's governing
body, or the entity's designee, shall notify the commission of
any ordinance or rule that imposes additional or more stringent
obligations with respect to lobbyist compensation reporting, or
other conduct involving lobbying activities, and shall forward
to the commission a copy of any associated form that has been
established to facilitate compliance with such ordinance or
rule. Beginning October 1, 2019, each governmental entity is
encouraged to conform its lobbyist regulation system, if any, to
accommodate regular digital distribution of lobbyist
registration data from the commission so that initial
registration of a lobbyist pursuant to subsection (3) is
accomplished without having to supply the lobbyist and principal
information to more than one lobbyist regulation system. The
commission shall cooperate to the extent reasonably practicable
to ensure such coordination of information.
(11)        The commission may adopt rules to establish
procedures to administer the Local Government Lobbyist
Registration System, including the staggering of registration
renewal dates based on the anniversary of the lobbyist's
registration or the month of the lobbyist's birth as selected by
the lobbyist at the time of registration, the adoption of forms,
the method of registering specific entities lobbied, the
exchange of information with local governmental entities, and
the establishment of fees authorized in this section.
(12)        A person, when in doubt about the applicability and
interpretation of this section, may submit in writing to the
commission the facts of the situation with a request for an
advisory opinion to establish a standard of duty. An advisory
opinion shall be rendered by the commission and, until amended
or revoked, is binding on the conduct of the person who sought
the opinion, unless material facts were omitted or misstated in
the request.
Section 11.           Subsection (3) of section 218.32, Florida
Statutes, is renumbered as subsection (4), and a new subsection
(3) is added to that section to read:
218.32        Annual financial reports; local governmental
entities.--
(3)     The department shall annually by December 1 file a
verified report with the Legislature and the Commission on
Ethics showing the total revenues for each municipality in each
of the 3 prior fiscal years and whether the municipality timely
filed its annual financial report in accordance with this
section. The report shall also indicate each municipality that
does not have a certified annual financial report in each such
year.
Section 12.         The Legislature finds that a proper and
legitimate state purpose is served when mechanisms are
established to secure and sustain the public's trust in public
officers and employees. Therefore, the Legislature determines
and declares that this act fulfills an important state interest.
Section 13.         Except as otherwise expressly provided in this
act, his act shall take effect July 1, 2018.