A bill to be entitled
An act relating to reporting of adverse incidents in
planned out-of-hospital births; creating s. 456.0495,
F.S.; defining the term "adverse incident"; requiring
licensed physicians, certified nurse midwives, or
licensed midwives to report an adverse incident and a
medical summary of events to the Department of Health
within a specified timeframe; requiring the department
to review adverse incident reports and determine if
conduct occurred that is subject to disciplinary
action; requiring the appropriate regulatory board or
the department to take disciplinary action under
certain circumstances; requiring the department to
adopt rules; requiring the department to develop a
form to be used for the reporting of adverse
incidents; providing an effective date.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:
Section 1.         Section 456.0495, Florida Statutes, is created
to read:
456.0495         Reporting adverse incidents occurring in planned
out-of-hospital births.--
(1)     For purposes of this section, the term "adverse
incident" means an event over which a physician licensed under
chapter 458 or chapter 459, a nurse midwife certified under part
I of chapter 464, or a midwife licensed under chapter 467 could
exercise control and which is associated with an attempted or
completed planned out-of-hospital birth, and results in one or
more of the following injuries or conditions:
(a)     A maternal death that occurs during delivery or within
42 days after delivery;
(b)     The transfer of a maternal patient to a hospital
intensive care unit;
(c)     A maternal patient who experiences hemorrhagic shock
or who requires a transfusion of more than 4 units of blood or
blood products;
(d)     A fetal or newborn death, including a stillbirth,
associated with an obstetrical delivery;
(e)     A transfer of a newborn to a neonatal intensive care
unit due to a traumatic physical or neurological birth injury,
including any degree of a brachial plexus injury;
(f)     A transfer of a newborn to a neonatal intensive care
unit within the first 72 hours after birth if the newborn
remains in such unit for more than 72 hours; or
(g)     Any other injury as determined by department rule.
(2)     A physician licensed under chapter 458 or chapter 459,
a nurse midwife certified under part I of chapter 464, or a
midwife licensed under chapter 467 who performs an attempted or
completed planned out-of-hospital birth must report an adverse
incident, along with a medical summary of events, to the
department within 15 days after the adverse incident occurs.
(3)     The department shall review each incident report and
determine whether the incident involves conduct by a health care
practitioner which is subject to disciplinary action under s.
456.073. Disciplinary action, if any, must be taken by the
appropriate regulatory board or by the department if no such
board exists.
(4)     The department shall adopt rules to implement this
section and shall develop a form to be used for the reporting of
adverse incidents.
Section 2.        This act shall take effect upon becoming a law.