A bill to be entitled                      
An act relating to ad valorem taxation; creating s.
196.2003, F.S.; providing definitions; providing for
certain property damaged or destroyed by a natural
disaster in 2017 to receive an abatement of certain
property taxes; specifying procedures for a property
owner to use in applying for an abatement of taxes;
requiring a property appraiser to investigate the
statements contained in applications that are
submitted; specifying procedures for a property
appraiser to use in notifying the tax collector when
an applicant is entitled to an abatement; providing
duties of the tax collector relating to determining
the amount of the disaster relief credit; requiring
the tax collector to reduce taxes in a specified
manner; requiring the tax collector to notify the
Department of Revenue and certain local governing
boards of the reduction in taxes; prohibiting
uninhabitable residential improvements from having any
value placed thereon; providing retroactive
applicability; providing for expiration; providing an
effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:

Section 1. Section 196.2003, Florida Statutes, is created
to read:
196.2003 Abatement of taxes for residential improvements
damaged or destroyed by a natural disaster.—
(1) As used in this section, the term:
(a) “Damage differential” means the product arrived at by
multiplying the percent change in value by a ratio, the
numerator of which is the number of months the residential
improvement was rendered uninhabitable, and the denominator of
which is 12.
(b) “Disaster relief credit” means the product arrived at
by multiplying the damage differential by the amount of timely
paid taxes that were initially levied in the year the natural
disaster occurred.
(c) “Natural disaster” means:
1. An event for which the Governor has declared a state of
emergency under s. 252.36; or
2. A sinkhole as defined in s. 627.706.
(d) “Percent change in value” means the percentage
difference between a residential parcel’s just value as of
January 1, 2017, and its postdisaster just value.
(e) “Postdisaster just value” means the just value of a
residential parcel reflecting the destruction and damage caused
by a natural disaster.
(f) “Residential improvement” means a residential dwelling
or house, but does not include a structure that is not essential
to the use and occupancy of the residential dwelling or house,
including, but not limited to, a detached utility building,
detached carport, detached garage, bulkhead, fence, or swimming
pool.
(g) “Uninhabitable” means the loss of use or occupancy of a
residential improvement for the purpose for which it was
constructed, as evidenced by documentation, including, but not
limited to, utility bills, insurance information, contractors’
statements, building permit applications, or building inspection
certificates of occupancy.
(2) If a residential improvement is rendered uninhabitable
due to damage or destruction to the property caused by a natural
disaster during the 2017 calendar year, taxes initially levied
in 2019 may be abated in the following manner:
(a) The property owner must file an application with the
property appraiser as soon as practicable after the damage or
destruction occurs, but no later than March 1, 2019. A property
owner who fails to file an application by March 1, 2019, waives
a claim for abatement of taxes from that natural disaster.
(b) The application must identify the residential parcel on
which the residential improvement was damaged or destroyed by
the natural disaster, the natural disaster that caused the
damage or destruction, the date the damage or destruction
occurred, and the number of months the property was
uninhabitable during the 2017 calendar year.
(c) The application must be verified under oath and is
subject to penalty of perjury.
(d) Upon receipt of the application, the property appraiser
shall investigate the statements contained in the application to
determine if the applicant is entitled to an abatement of taxes.
If the property appraiser determines that the applicant is
entitled to an abatement, the property appraiser must issue an
official written statement to the tax collector by April 1,
2019, which provides:
1. The number of months during the calendar year that the
residential improvement was uninhabitable. In calculating the
number of months, a period of at least 16 days is considered a
full month.
2. The just value of the residential parcel, as determined
by the property appraiser on January 1, 2017.
3. The postdisaster just value of the residential parcel,
as determined by the property appraiser.
4. The percent change in value applicable to the
residential parcel.
(3) Upon receipt of the written statement from the property
appraiser, the tax collector shall calculate the damage
differential and disaster relief credit pursuant to this
section. The tax collector shall reduce the taxes initially
levied on the residential parcel by an amount equal to the
disaster relief credit. If the value of the credit exceeds the
taxes levied in 2019, the remaining value of the credit shall be
applied to taxes due in subsequent years until the value of the
credit is exhausted.
(4) No later than May 1, 2019, the tax collector shall
notify:
(a) The Department of Revenue of the total reduction in
taxes for all properties that received an abatement pursuant to
this section.
(b) The governing board of each affected local government
of the reduction in that local government’s taxes which will
occur pursuant to this section.
(5) For purposes of this section, residential improvements
that are uninhabitable shall have no value placed thereon.
(6) This section applies retroactively to January 1, 2017,
and expires January 1, 2021.
Section 2. This act shall take effect upon becoming a law.