A bill to be entitled                      
An act relating to public records; amending s.
288.1259, F.S.; providing an exemption from public
records requirements for certain application
information submitted to the Florida Motion Picture
Capital Corporation; providing for legislative review
and repeal of the exemption; providing a statement of
public necessity; providing a contingent effective
date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:

Section 1. Subsection (8) is added to section 288.1259,
Florida Statutes, as created by SB ___, to read:
288.1259 Florida Motion Picture Capital Corporation.—
(8) APPLICATIONS; PUBLIC RECORDS EXEMPTION.—Personal
financial records, trade secrets, and proprietary information of
persons applying for financing for a production are confidential
and exempt from s. 119.07(1) and s. 24(a), Art. I of the State
Constitution. This subsection is subject to the Open Government
Sunset Review Act in accordance with s. 119.15 and shall stand
repealed on October 2, 2023, unless reviewed and saved from
repeal through reenactment by the Legislature.
Section 2. The Legislature finds that it is a public
necessity that personal financial records, trade secrets, and
proprietary information of persons applying for financing by the
Florida Motion Picture Capital Corporation in a production be
exempt from s. 119.07(1), Florida Statutes, and s. 24(a),
Article I of the State Constitution. If the personal financial
records, trade secrets, and proprietary information of persons
applying for financing were subject to disclosure, a chilling
effect on participation would result. There is a strong
likelihood that productions would choose not to apply for
financing from the Florida Motion Picture Capital Corporation.
Since productions are required to make in-state expenditures as
a condition of receiving such financing, the chilling effect
caused by such disclosure would undermine the public purpose of
the Florida Motion Picture Capital Corporation to encourage this
state to be used as a site for scripted productions and would
consequently result in productions being produced outside of the
state.
Section 3. This act shall take effect on the same date that
SB ___ or similar legislation takes effect, if such legislation
is adopted in the same legislative session or an extension
thereof and becomes a law.