A bill to be entitled                      
An act relating to metropolitan planning
organizations; amending s. 339.175, F.S.; requiring
the voting membership of a metropolitan planning
organization (M.P.O.) that is designated before a
specified date to consist of a certain number of
apportioned members, subject to certain requirements;
requiring the voting membership of an M.P.O.
designated on or after a specified date as a result of
a combination or merger of previously separate
M.P.O.'s to consist of a certain number of members,
subject to certain requirements; authorizing the
Governor to allow M.P.O. members who represent
municipalities to alternate with representatives from
other municipalities within the metropolitan planning
area which do not have members on the M.P.O.;
providing requirements for voting members; authorizing
an M.P.O. to include certain voting members;
conforming a term; providing an effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:

Section 1. Subsection (3) and paragraph (b) of subsection
(4) of section 339.175, Florida Statutes, are amended to read:
339.175 Metropolitan planning organization.—
(3) VOTING MEMBERSHIP.—
(a) The voting membership of an M.P.O. that is designated
before July 1, 2018, shall consist of at least 5 but not more
than 25 apportioned members, with the exact number determined on
an equitable geographic-population ratio basis, based on an
agreement among the affected units of general-purpose local
government and the Governor, as required by federal regulations.
In accordance with 23 U.S.C. s. 134, the Governor may also allow
M.P.O. members who represent municipalities to alternate with
representatives from other municipalities within the
metropolitan planning area which do not have members on the
M.P.O. With the exception of instances in which all of the
county commissioners in a single-county M.P.O. are members of
the M.P.O. governing board, county commissioners shall compose
at least one-third of the M.P.O. governing board membership. A
multicounty M.P.O. may satisfy this requirement by any
combination of county commissioners from each of the counties
constituting the M.P.O. Voting members shall be elected
officials of general-purpose local governments, one of whom may
represent a group of general-purpose local governments through
an entity created by an M.P.O. for that purpose. An M.P.O. may
include, as part of its apportioned voting members, a member of
a statutorily authorized planning board, an official of an
agency that operates or administers a major mode of
transportation, or an official of Space Florida. As used in this
section, the term “elected officials of a general-purpose local
governments government” excludes constitutional officers,
including sheriffs, tax collectors, supervisors of elections,
property appraisers, clerks of the court, and similar types of
officials. County commissioners shall compose not less than 20
percent of the M.P.O. membership if an official of an agency
that operates or administers a major mode of transportation has
been appointed to an M.P.O.
(b) The voting membership of an M.P.O. designated on or
after July 1, 2018, as a result of a combination or merger of
previously separate M.P.O.’s, shall consist of at least five
members, with the exact number determined on an equitable
geographic-population ratio basis, based on an agreement among
the affected units of general-purpose local government and the
Governor, as required by federal regulations. In accordance with
23 U.S.C. s. 134, the Governor may allow M.P.O. members who
represent municipalities to alternate with representatives from
other municipalities within the metropolitan planning area which
do not have members on the M.P.O. Voting members must be elected
officials of general-purpose local governments, one of whom may
represent a group of general-purpose local governments through
an entity created by an M.P.O. for that purpose. An M.P.O. may
include, as part of its apportioned voting members, a member of
a statutorily authorized planning board, an official of an
agency that operates or administers a major mode of
transportation, or an official of Space Florida.
(c)(b) In metropolitan areas in which authorities or other
agencies have been or may be created by law to perform
transportation functions and are or will be performing
transportation functions that are not under the jurisdiction of
a general-purpose local government represented on the M.P.O.,
such authorities or other agencies may be provided voting
membership on the M.P.O. In all other M.P.O.’s in which
transportation authorities or agencies are to be represented by
elected officials of from general-purpose local governments, the
M.P.O. shall establish a process by which the collective
interests of such authorities or other agencies are expressed
and conveyed.
(d)(c) Any other provision of this section to the contrary
notwithstanding, a chartered county with over 1 million
population may elect to reapportion the membership of an M.P.O.
whose jurisdiction is wholly within the county. The charter
county may exercise the provisions of this paragraph if:
1. The M.P.O. approves the reapportionment plan by a three
fourths vote of its membership;
2. The M.P.O. and the charter county determine that the
reapportionment plan is needed to fulfill specific goals and
policies applicable to that metropolitan planning area; and
3. The charter county determines the reapportionment plan
otherwise complies with all federal requirements pertaining to
M.P.O. membership.

Any charter county that elects to exercise the provisions of
this paragraph shall notify the Governor in writing.
(e)(d) Any other provision of this section to the contrary
notwithstanding, any county chartered under s. 6(e), Art. VIII
of the State Constitution may elect to have its county
commission serve as the M.P.O., if the M.P.O. jurisdiction is
wholly contained within the county. Any charter county that
elects to exercise the provisions of this paragraph shall so
notify the Governor in writing. Upon receipt of such
notification, the Governor must designate the county commission
as the M.P.O. The Governor must appoint four additional voting
members to the M.P.O., one of whom must be an elected official
representing a municipality within the county, one of whom must
be an expressway authority member, one of whom must be a person
who does not hold elected public office and who resides in the
unincorporated portion of the county, and one of whom must be a
school board member.
(4) APPORTIONMENT.—
(b) Except for members who represent municipalities on the
basis of alternating with representatives from other
municipalities that do not have members on the M.P.O. as
provided in paragraphs (3)(a) and (b) paragraph (3)(a), the
members of an M.P.O. shall serve 4-year terms. Members who
represent municipalities on the basis of alternating with
representatives from other municipalities that do not have
members on the M.P.O. as provided in paragraphs (3)(a) and (b)
paragraph (3)(a) may serve terms of up to 4 years as further
provided in the interlocal agreement described in paragraph
(2)(b). The membership of a member who is a public official
automatically terminates upon the member’s leaving his or her
elective or appointive office for any reason, or may be
terminated by a majority vote of the total membership of the
entity’s governing board represented by the member. A vacancy
shall be filled by the original appointing entity. A member may
be reappointed for one or more additional 4-year terms.
Section 2. This act shall take effect July 1, 2018.