A bill to be entitled                      
An act relating to physician orders for life
sustaining treatment; creating s. 401.451, F.S.;
establishing the Physician Orders for Life-Sustaining
Treatment (POLST) Program within the Department of
Health; defining terms; providing duties of the
department; providing requirements for POLST forms;
providing a restriction on the use of POLST forms;
requiring periodic review of POLST forms; providing
for the revocation of POLST forms under certain
circumstances; authorizing expedited judicial
intervention under certain circumstances; specifying
which document takes precedence when directives in
POLST forms conflict with other advance directives;
providing limited immunity for legal representatives
and specified health care providers acting in good
faith in reliance on POLST forms; specifying
additional requirements for POLST forms executed on
behalf of minor patients under certain circumstances;
requiring the review of a POLST form upon the transfer
of a patient; prohibiting POLST forms from being
required as a condition for treatment or admission to
health care facilities; providing that the presence or
absence of POLST forms does not affect, impair, or
modify certain insurance contracts; declaring a POLST
form invalid if it is executed in exchange for payment
or other remuneration; providing construction;
creating s. 408.064, F.S.; defining terms; requiring
the Agency for Health Care Administration to establish
and maintain a database of compassionate and
palliative care plans by a specified date; providing
duties of the agency; authorizing the agency to
subscribe to or participate in a public or private
clearinghouse in lieu of establishing and maintaining
an independent database; amending ss. 400.142 and
400.487, F.S.; authorizing specified personnel to
withhold or withdraw cardiopulmonary resuscitation if
presented with a POLST form that contains an order not
to resuscitate the patient; providing immunity from
criminal prosecution or civil liability to such
personnel for such actions; providing that the absence
of a POLST form does not preclude physicians or home
health agency personnel from withholding or
withdrawing cardiopulmonary resuscitation under
certain conditions; amending s. 400.605, F.S.;
requiring the Department of Elderly Affairs, in
consultation with the agency, to adopt by rule
procedures for the implementation of POLST forms in
hospice care; amending s. 400.6095, F.S.; authorizing
hospice care teams to withhold or withdraw
cardiopulmonary resuscitation if presented with POLST
forms that contain an order not to resuscitate;
providing immunity from criminal prosecution or civil
liability to hospice staff for such actions; providing
that the absence of a POLST form does not preclude
physicians from withholding or withdrawing
cardiopulmonary resuscitation; amending s. 401.35,
F.S.; requiring the Department of Health to establish
circumstances and procedures for honoring certain
POLST forms; amending s. 401.45, F.S.; authorizing
emergency medical personnel to withhold or withdraw
cardiopulmonary resuscitation or other medical
interventions if presented with POLST forms that
contain an order not to resuscitate; amending s.
429.255, F.S.; authorizing assisted living facility
personnel to withhold or withdraw cardiopulmonary
resuscitation or the use of an automated external
defibrillator if presented with POLST forms that
contain an order not to resuscitate; providing
immunity from criminal prosecution or civil liability
to facility staff and facilities for such actions;
providing that the absence of a POLST form does not
preclude physicians from withholding or withdrawing
cardiopulmonary resuscitation or the use of an
automated external defibrillator; amending s. 429.73,
F.S.; requiring the Department of Elderly Affairs to
adopt rules for the implementation of POLST forms in
adult family-care homes; authorizing providers of such
homes to withhold or withdraw cardiopulmonary
resuscitation if presented with POLST forms that
contain an order not to resuscitate; providing
immunity from criminal prosecution or civil liability
to providers for such actions; amending s. 456.072,
F.S.; authorizing certain licensees to withhold or
withdraw cardiopulmonary resuscitation or the use of
an automated external defibrillator if presented with
orders not to resuscitate or POLST forms that contain
an order not to resuscitate; requiring the Department
of Health to adopt rules providing for the
implementation of such orders; providing immunity from
criminal prosecution or civil liability to licensees
for withholding or withdrawing cardiopulmonary
resuscitation or the use of an automated external
defibrillator or for carrying out specified orders
under certain circumstances; providing that the
absence of a POLST form does not preclude a licensee
from withholding or withdrawing cardiopulmonary
resuscitation or the use of an automated external
defibrillator under certain conditions; amending s.
765.205, F.S.; requiring health care surrogates to
provide written consent for POLST forms under certain
circumstances; providing an effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:

Section 1. Section 401.451, Florida Statutes, is created to
read:
401.451 Physician Orders for Life-Sustaining Treatment
Program.—The Physician Orders for Life-Sustaining Treatment
Program is established within the Department of Health to
implement and administer the development and use of physician
orders for life-sustaining treatment consistent with this
section and to collaborate with the Agency for Health Care
Administration in the implementation and operation of the
Clearinghouse for Compassionate and Palliative Care Plans
created under s. 408.064.
(1) DEFINITIONS.—As used in this section, the term:
(a) “Advance directive” has the same meaning as provided in
s. 765.101.
(b) “Agency” means the Agency for Health Care
Administration.
(c) “Clearinghouse for Compassionate and Palliative Care
Plans” or “clearinghouse” has the same meaning as provided in s.
408.064.
(d) “End-stage condition” has the same meaning as provided
in s. 765.101.
(e) “Examining physician” means a physician who examines a
patient who wishes, or whose legal representative wishes, to
execute a POLST form; who attests to the ability of the patient
or the patient’s legal representative to make and communicate
health care decisions; who signs the POLST form; and who attests
to the execution of the POLST form by the patient or by the
patient’s legal representative.
(f) “Health care provider” has the same meaning as provided
in s. 408.07.
(g) “Legal representative” means a patient’s legally
authorized health care surrogate or proxy as provided in chapter
765, a patient’s court-appointed guardian as provided in chapter
744 who has been delegated authority to make health care
decisions on behalf of the patient, an attorney in fact under a
durable power of attorney as provided in chapter 709 who has
been delegated authority to make health care decisions on behalf
of the patient, or a patient’s parent if the patient is under 18
years of age.
(h) “Order not to resuscitate” means an order issued under
s. 401.45(3).
(i) “Physician order for life-sustaining treatment” or
“POLST” means an order issued pursuant to this section which
specifies a patient with an end-stage condition and provides
directives for that patient’s medical treatment and care under
certain conditions.
(2) DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT.—The department shall:
(a) Adopt rules to implement and administer the POLST
program.
(b) Prescribe a standardized POLST form.
(c) Provide the POLST form in an electronic format on the
department’s website and prominently state on the website the
requirements for a POLST form as specified under paragraph
(3)(a).
(d) Consult with health care professional licensing groups,
provider advocacy groups, medical ethicists, and other
appropriate stakeholders on the development of rules and forms
to implement and administer the POLST program.
(e) Collaborate with the agency to develop and maintain the
clearinghouse.
(f) Ensure that department staff receive ongoing training
on the POLST program and are aware of the availability of POLST
forms.
(g) Recommend a statewide, uniform process for identifying
a patient who has, or whose legal representative has, executed a
POLST form and for providing the contact information for the
examining physician to the health care providers currently
treating the patient.
(h) Adopt POLST-related continuing education requirements
for health care providers licensed by the department.
(i) Develop a process for collecting feedback from health
care providers to facilitate the periodic redesign of the POLST
form in accordance with current health care best practices.
(3) POLST FORM.—
(a) Requirements.—A POLST form may not include a directive
regarding hydration or the preselection of any decision or
directive. A POLST form must be voluntarily executed by the
patient or, if the patient is incapacitated or a minor, the
patient’s legal representative, and all directives included in
the form must be made by the patient or, if the patient is
incapacitated or a minor, the patient’s legal representative at
the time of signing the form. A POLST form is not valid and may
not be included in a patient’s medical records or submitted to
the clearinghouse unless the form:
1. Is clearly printed on one or both sides of a single
piece of paper as determined by department rule;
2. Includes the signatures of the patient and the patient’s
examining physician or, if the patient is incapacitated or a
minor, the patient’s legal representative and the patient’s
examining physician. The POLST form may be executed only after
the examining physician consults with the patient or the
patient’s legal representative, as appropriate;
3. Prominently states that completion of a POLST form is
voluntary, that the execution or use of a POLST form may not be
required as a condition for medical treatment, and that a POLST
form may not be given effect if the patient is conscious and
competent to make health care decisions;
4. Prominently provides in a conspicuous location on the
form a space for the patient’s examining physician to attest
that, in his or her clinical judgment and with good faith, at
the time the POLST form is completed and signed, the patient has
the ability to make and communicate health care decisions or, if
the patient is incapacitated or a minor, that the patient’s
legal representative has such ability;
5. Includes an expiration date, provided by the patient’s
examining physician, that is within 1 year after the patient or
the patient’s legal representative signs the form or that is
contingent on completion of the course of treatment addressed in
the POLST form, whichever occurs first; and
6. Identifies the medical condition or conditions, provided
by the patient’s examining physician, that necessitate the POLST
form.
(b) Restriction on the use of a POLST form.—A POLST form
may be completed only by or for a patient determined by the
patient’s examining physician to have an end-stage condition or
a patient who, in the good faith clinical judgment of the
examining physician, is suffering from a life-limiting medical
condition that will likely result in the death of the patient
within 1 year after the execution of the form.
(c) Periodic review of a POLST form.—At a minimum, the
patient’s examining physician must review the patient’s POLST
form with the patient or the patient’s legal representative, as
appropriate, when the patient:
1. Is transferred from one health care facility or level of
care to another in accordance with subsection (6);
2. Is discharged from a health care facility to return home
before the expiration of the POLST form;
3. Experiences a substantial change in his or her condition
as determined by the patient’s examining physician, in which
case the review must occur within 24 hours after the substantial
change; or
4. Expresses an intent to change his or her medical
treatment preferences.
(d) Revocation of a POLST form.—
1. A POLST form may be revoked at any time by the patient
or the patient’s legal representative if the patient is a minor
or if the patient is incapacitated and has granted the authority
to revoke a POLST form to his or her legal representative.
2. The execution of a POLST form by a patient and the
patient’s examining physician or, if the patient is
incapacitated or a minor, by the patient’s legal representative
and the patient’s examining physician under this section
automatically revokes all POLST forms previously executed by the
patient.
(e) Review of a legal representative’s decision on a POLST
form.—If a family member of the patient, the health care
facility providing services to the patient, or the patient’s
physician who may reasonably be expected to be affected by the
patient’s POLST form directives believes that directives
executed by the patient’s legal representative are in conflict
with the patient’s prior expressed desires regarding end-of-life
care, the family member, facility, or physician may seek
expedited judicial intervention pursuant to the Florida Probate
Rules.
(f) Conflicting advance directives.—To the extent that a
directive made on a patient’s POLST form conflicts with another
advance directive of the patient which addresses a substantially
similar health care condition or treatment, the document most
recently signed by the patient takes precedence. Such directives
may include, but are not limited to:
1. A living will.
2. A health care power of attorney.
3. A POLST form for the specific medical condition or
treatment.
4. An order not to resuscitate.
(4) ACTING IN GOOD FAITH; LIMITED IMMUNITY.—
(a) An individual acting in good faith as a legal
representative who executes a POLST form on behalf of an
incapacitated patient or a minor patient in accordance with this
section and rules adopted by the department is not subject to
criminal prosecution or civil liability for executing the POLST
form.
(b) A licensee, physician, medical director, emergency
medical technician, paramedic, or registered nurse who in good
faith complies with a POLST form is not subject to criminal
prosecution or civil liability for complying with the POLST
form, and has not engaged in negligent or unprofessional conduct
as a result of carrying out the directives of a POLST form
executed in accordance with this section and rules adopted by
the department.
(5) POLST FORM FOR A MINOR PATIENT.—If a medical order on a
POLST form executed for a minor patient directs that life
sustaining treatment may be withheld from the minor patient, the
order must include certifications by the patient’s examining
physician and a health care provider other than the examining
physician stating that, in their clinical judgment, an order to
withhold medical treatment is in the best interest of the minor
patient. A POLST form for a minor patient must be signed by the
minor patient’s legal representative. The minor patient’s
examining physician must certify the basis for the authority of
the minor patient’s legal representative to execute the POLST
form on behalf of the minor patient, including the legal
representative’s compliance with the relevant provisions of
chapter 744 or chapter 765.
(6) PATIENT TRANSFER; POLST FORM REVIEW REQUIRED.—If a
patient whose goals and preferences for care have been entered
in a valid POLST form is transferred from one health care
facility or level of care to another, the health care facility
or level of care initiating the transfer must communicate the
existence of the POLST form to the receiving facility or level
of care before the transfer. Upon the patient’s transfer, the
treating health care provider at the receiving facility or level
of care must review the POLST form with the patient or, if the
patient is incapacitated or a minor, the patient’s legal
representative.
(7) POLST FORM NOT A PREREQUISITE.—A POLST form may not be
a prerequisite for receiving medical services or for admission
to a health care facility. A health care facility or health care
provider may not require a person to complete, revise, or revoke
a POLST form as a condition of receiving medical services or
treatment or as a condition of admission. The execution,
revision, or revocation of a POLST form must be a voluntary
decision of the patient or, if the patient is incapacitated or a
minor, the patient’s legal representative.
(8) INSURANCE NOT AFFECTED.—The presence or absence of a
POLST form does not affect, impair, or modify a contract of life
or health insurance or annuity to which an individual is a party
and may not serve as the basis for a delay in issuing or
refusing to issue a policy of life or health insurance or an
annuity or for an increase or decrease in premiums charged to
the individual.
(9) INVALIDITY.—A POLST form is invalid if payment or other
remuneration was offered or made in exchange for execution of
the form.
(10) CONSTRUCTION.—This section may not be construed to
condone, authorize, or approve mercy killing or euthanasia. The
Legislature does not intend that this act be construed as
authorizing an affirmative or deliberate act to end a person’s
life, except to allow the natural process of dying.
Section 2. Section 408.064, Florida Statutes, is created to
read:
408.064 Clearinghouse for Compassionate and Palliative Care
Plans.—
(1) DEFINITIONS.—As used in this section, the term:
(a) “Advance directive” has the same meaning as provided in
s. 765.101.
(b) “Clearinghouse for Compassionate and Palliative Care
Plans” or “clearinghouse” means the state’s electronic database
of compassionate and palliative care plans submitted by
residents of this state and managed by the agency pursuant to
this section.
(c) “Compassionate and palliative care plan” or “plan”
means an end-of-life document or medical directive document
recognized by this state and executed by a resident of this
state, including, but not limited to, an advance directive, an
order not to resuscitate, a physician order for life-sustaining
treatment, or a health care surrogate designation.
(d) “Department” means the Department of Health.
(e) “End-stage condition” has the same meaning as provided
in s. 765.101.
(f) “Order not to resuscitate” means an order issued
pursuant to s. 401.45(3).
(g) “Physician order for life-sustaining treatment” or
“POLST” means an order issued pursuant to s. 401.451 which
specifies a patient with an end-stage condition and provides
directions for that patient’s medical treatment and care under
certain conditions.
(2) ELECTRONIC DATABASE.—The Agency for Health Care
Administration shall:
(a) By January 1, 2019, establish and maintain the
Clearinghouse for Compassionate and Palliative Care Plans, a
reliable and secure database consisting of compassionate and
palliative care plans submitted by residents of this state which
is accessible to health care providers, health care facilities,
and other authorized individuals through a secure electronic
portal. The clearinghouse must allow the electronic submission,
storage, indexing, and retrieval of such plans and allow access
to them by the treating health care providers of the patients.
(b) Develop and maintain a validation system that confirms
the identity of the health care facility, health care provider,
or other authorized individual seeking the retrieval of a plan
and provides privacy protections that meet all state and federal
privacy and security standards for the release of a patient’s
personal and medical information to a third party.
(c) Consult with compassionate and palliative care
providers, health care facilities, and residents of this state
as necessary and appropriate to facilitate the development and
implementation of the clearinghouse.
(d) Publish and disseminate to residents of this state
information regarding the clearinghouse.
(e) In collaboration with the department, develop and
maintain a process for the submission of compassionate and
palliative care plans by residents of this state or by health
care providers on behalf of, and at the direction of, their
patients, or the patients’ legal representatives as defined in
s. 401.451, for inclusion in the clearinghouse.
(f) Provide training to health care providers and health
care facilities in this state on how to access plans in the
clearinghouse.
(3) ALTERNATIVE IMPLEMENTATION.—In lieu of establishing and
maintaining the clearinghouse, the agency may subscribe to or
otherwise participate in a database operated by a public or
private entity if that database meets the requirements of this
section. The alternative database must operate on a statewide
basis in this state, and may operate on a nationwide or
regionwide basis.
Section 3. Subsection (3) of section 400.142, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
400.142 Emergency medication kits; orders not to
resuscitate.—
(3) Facility staff may withhold or withdraw cardiopulmonary
resuscitation if presented with an order not to resuscitate
executed pursuant to s. 401.45 or a physician order for life
sustaining treatment (POLST) form executed pursuant to s.
401.451 which contains an order not to resuscitate. Facility
staff and facilities are not subject to criminal prosecution or
civil liability, or considered to have engaged in negligent or
unprofessional conduct, for withholding or withdrawing
cardiopulmonary resuscitation pursuant to such an order or a
POLST form. The absence of an order not to resuscitate executed
pursuant to s. 401.45 or a POLST form executed pursuant to s.
401.451 does not preclude a physician from withholding or
withdrawing cardiopulmonary resuscitation as otherwise
authorized permitted by law.
Section 4. Section 400.487, Florida Statutes, is amended to
read:
400.487 Home health service agreements; physician’s,
physician assistant’s, and advanced registered nurse
practitioner’s treatment orders; patient assessment;
establishment and review of plan of care; provision of services;
orders not to resuscitate; physician orders for life-sustaining
treatment.—
(1) Services provided by a home health agency must be
covered by an agreement between the home health agency and the
patient or the patient’s legal representative specifying the
home health services to be provided, the rates or charges for
services paid with private funds, and the sources of payment,
which may include Medicare, Medicaid, private insurance,
personal funds, or a combination thereof. A home health agency
providing skilled care must make an assessment of the patient’s
needs within 48 hours after the start of services.
(2) If When required by the provisions of chapter 464; part
I, part III, or part V of chapter 468; or chapter 486, the
attending physician, physician assistant, or advanced registered
nurse practitioner, acting within his or her respective scope of
practice, shall establish treatment orders for a patient who is
to receive skilled care. The treatment orders must be signed by
the physician, physician assistant, or advanced registered nurse
practitioner before a claim for payment for the skilled services
is submitted by the home health agency. If the claim is
submitted to a managed care organization, the treatment orders
must be signed within the time allowed under the provider
agreement. The treatment orders shall be reviewed, as frequently
as the patient’s illness requires, by the physician, physician
assistant, or advanced registered nurse practitioner in
consultation with the home health agency.
(3) A home health agency shall arrange for supervisory
visits by a registered nurse to the home of a patient receiving
home health aide services in accordance with the patient’s
direction, approval, and agreement to pay the charge for the
visits.
(4) Each patient has the right to be informed of and to
participate in the planning of his or her care. Each patient
must be provided, upon request, a copy of the plan of care
established and maintained for that patient by the home health
agency.
(5) If When nursing services are ordered, the home health
agency to which a patient has been admitted for care must
provide the initial admission visit, all service evaluation
visits, and the discharge visit by a direct employee. Services
provided by others under contractual arrangements to a home
health agency must be monitored and managed by the admitting
home health agency. The admitting home health agency is fully
responsible for ensuring that all care provided through its
employees or contract staff is delivered in accordance with this
part and applicable rules.
(6) The skilled care services provided by a home health
agency, directly or under contract, must be supervised and
coordinated in accordance with the plan of care.
(7) Home health agency personnel may withhold or withdraw
cardiopulmonary resuscitation if presented with an order not to
resuscitate executed pursuant to s. 401.45 or a physician order
for life-sustaining treatment (POLST) form executed pursuant to
s. 401.451 which contains an order not to resuscitate. The
agency shall adopt rules providing for the implementation of
such orders. Home health personnel and agencies are shall not be
subject to criminal prosecution or civil liability, and are not
nor be considered to have engaged in negligent or unprofessional
conduct, for withholding or withdrawing cardiopulmonary
resuscitation pursuant to such orders an order and rules adopted
by the agency.
Section 5. Paragraph (e) of subsection (1) of section
400.605, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
400.605 Administration; forms; fees; rules; inspections;
fines.—
(1) The agency, in consultation with the department, may
adopt rules to administer the requirements of part II of chapter
408. The department, in consultation with the agency, shall by
rule establish minimum standards and procedures for a hospice
pursuant to this part. The rules must include:
(e) Procedures relating to the implementation of advance
advanced directives; physician orders for life-sustaining
treatment (POLST) forms executed pursuant to s. 401.451; and
orders not to resuscitate do-not-resuscitate orders.
Section 6. Subsection (8) of section 400.6095, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
400.6095 Patient admission; assessment; plan of care;
discharge; death.—
(8) The hospice care team may withhold or withdraw
cardiopulmonary resuscitation if presented with an order not to
resuscitate executed pursuant to s. 401.45 or a physician order
for life-sustaining treatment (POLST) form executed pursuant to
s. 401.451 which contains an order not to resuscitate. The
department shall adopt rules providing for the implementation of
such orders. Hospice staff are shall not be subject to criminal
prosecution or civil liability, and are not nor be considered to
have engaged in negligent or unprofessional conduct, for
withholding or withdrawing cardiopulmonary resuscitation
pursuant to such orders an order and applicable rules. The
absence of an order to resuscitate executed pursuant to s.
401.45 or a POLST form executed pursuant to s. 401.451 does not
preclude a physician from withholding or withdrawing
cardiopulmonary resuscitation as otherwise authorized permitted
by law.
Section 7. Subsection (4) of section 401.35, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
401.35 Rules.—The department shall adopt rules, including
definitions of terms, necessary to carry out the purposes of
this part.
(4) The rules must establish circumstances and procedures
under which emergency medical technicians and paramedics may
honor orders by the patient’s physician not to resuscitate
executed pursuant to s. 401.45, or under a physician order for
life-sustaining treatment (POLST) form executed pursuant to s.
401.451 which contains an order not to resuscitate, or honor
orders to withhold or withdraw other forms of medical
intervention, and the documentation and reporting requirements
for handling such requests.
Section 8. Paragraph (a) of subsection (3) of section
401.45, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
401.45 Denial of emergency treatment; civil liability.—
(3)(a) Resuscitation or other forms of medical intervention
may be withheld or withdrawn from a patient by an emergency
medical technician, or paramedic, or other health care
professional if the technician, paramedic, or professional is
presented with evidence of an order not to resuscitate by the
patient’s physician or evidence of a physician order for life
sustaining treatment (POLST) form executed pursuant to s.
401.451 which contains an order not to resuscitate or an order
not to perform other medical intervention, as applicable is
presented to the emergency medical technician or paramedic. To
be valid, an order not to resuscitate or not to perform other
medical intervention, to be valid, must be on the form adopted
by rule of the department. The form must be signed by the
patient’s physician and by the patient or, if the patient is
incapacitated, the patient’s health care surrogate or proxy as
provided in chapter 765, court-appointed guardian as provided in
chapter 744, or attorney in fact under a durable power of
attorney as provided in chapter 709 or, if the patient is a
minor, the patient’s parent or legal guardian. The court
appointed guardian or attorney in fact must have been delegated
authority to make health care decisions on behalf of the
patient.
Section 9. Subsection (4) of section 429.255, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
429.255 Use of personnel; emergency care.—
(4) Facility staff may withhold or withdraw cardiopulmonary
resuscitation or the use of an automated external defibrillator
if presented with an order not to resuscitate executed pursuant
to s. 401.45 or a physician order for life-sustaining treatment
(POLST) form executed pursuant to s. 401.451 which contains an
order not to resuscitate. The department shall adopt rules
providing for the implementation of such orders. Facility staff
and facilities are shall not be subject to criminal prosecution
or civil liability, and are not nor be considered to have
engaged in negligent or unprofessional conduct, for withholding
or withdrawing cardiopulmonary resuscitation or the use of an
automated external defibrillator pursuant to such an order or a
POLST form which contains an order not to resuscitate and rules
adopted by the department. The absence of an order not to
resuscitate executed pursuant to s. 401.45 or a POLST form
executed pursuant to s. 401.451 does not preclude a physician
from withholding or withdrawing cardiopulmonary resuscitation or
the use of an automated external defibrillator as otherwise
authorized permitted by law.
Section 10. Subsection (3) of section 429.73, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
429.73 Rules and standards relating to adult family-care
homes.—
(3) The department shall adopt rules providing for the
implementation of orders not to resuscitate and physician orders
for life-sustaining treatment (POLST) forms executed pursuant to
s. 401.451. The provider may withhold or withdraw
cardiopulmonary resuscitation if presented with an order not to
resuscitate executed pursuant to s. 401.45 or a POLST form
executed pursuant to s. 401.451 which contains an order not to
resuscitate. The provider is shall not be subject to criminal
prosecution or civil liability, and is not nor be considered to
have engaged in negligent or unprofessional conduct, for
withholding or withdrawing cardiopulmonary resuscitation
pursuant to such orders an order and applicable rules.
Section 11. Present subsections (7) and (8) of section
456.072, Florida Statutes, are redesignated as subsections (8)
and (9), respectively, and a new subsection (7) is added to that
section, to read:
456.072 Grounds for discipline; penalties; enforcement.—
(7) A licensee may withhold or withdraw cardiopulmonary
resuscitation or the use of an automated external defibrillator
if presented with an order not to resuscitate executed pursuant
to s. 401.45 or a physician order for life-sustaining treatment
(POLST) form executed pursuant to s. 401.451 which contains an
order not to resuscitate. The department shall adopt rules
providing for the implementation of such orders. A licensee is
not subject to criminal prosecution or civil liability, and is
not considered to have engaged in negligent or unprofessional
conduct, for withholding or withdrawing cardiopulmonary
resuscitation or the use of an automated external defibrillator,
or otherwise carrying out an order in an order not to
resuscitate executed pursuant to s. 401.45 or a POLST form
executed pursuant to s. 401.451, pursuant to the order not to
resuscitate or the POLST form and pursuant to rules adopted by
the department. The absence of an order not to resuscitate
executed pursuant to s. 401.45 or a POLST form executed pursuant
to s. 401.451 does not preclude a licensee from withholding or
withdrawing cardiopulmonary resuscitation or the use of an
automated external defibrillator or otherwise carrying out a
medical order authorized by law.
Section 12. Paragraph (c) of subsection (1) of section
765.205, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
765.205 Responsibility of the surrogate.—
(1) The surrogate, in accordance with the principal’s
instructions, unless such authority has been expressly limited
by the principal, shall:
(c) Provide written consent using an appropriate form
whenever consent is required, including a physician’s order not
to resuscitate or a physician order for life-sustaining
treatment (POLST) form executed pursuant to s. 401.451.
Section 13. This act shall take effect July 1, 2018.