A bill to be entitled                      
An act relating to broadband service privacy; creating
s. 364.0131, F.S.; defining terms; prohibiting
Internet service providers from using, disclosing,
selling, or permitting external access to certain
customer information, except under specified
conditions; specifying an effective date for the
prohibition; requiring providers to furnish a prior
opt-in consent; specifying requirements and
disclosures for the consent; prohibiting providers
from retaining customer information any longer than
necessary; providing exceptions; requiring providers
to implement and maintain certain security procedures
and practices; specifying that providers may not
penalize customers for refusing to provide consent or
offer customers discounts for providing consent;
prohibiting providers from refusing or failing to
disclose customer personal information upon written
request from the customer; clarifying that generating,
using, disclosing, selling, or permitting access to
aggregate customer information is permissible;
specifying that providers may use customer information
to market communication-related services to the
customer under certain conditions; authorizing
providers to employ security measures; providing
applicability; specifying that customer waivers are
void and unenforceable; requiring the Public Service
Commission to administer and enforce the act and to
impose and collect certain penalties; authorizing the
commission to adopt rules; providing effective dates.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:

Section 1. Section 364.0131, Florida Statutes, is created
to read:
364.0131 Broadband service privacy.—
(1) As used in this section, the term:
(a) “Aggregate customer information” means collective data
that relates to a group or category of customers, from which
individual customer identities and characteristics have been
removed, and which is not linked or reasonably linkable to any
individual person, household, or device. The term does not
include individual customer records that have been deidentified.
(b) “Customer” means a current or former subscriber to the
broadband service, or an applicant for broadband service.
(c) “Customer personal information” means information
collected from or about an individual customer or user of the
customer’s subscription which is made available to the Internet
service provider by a customer or user of the customer’s
subscription solely by virtue of the provider-customer
relationship, including:
1. Name and billing information.
2. Government-issued identifiers such as, but not limited
to, a social security number, driver license number, military
identification, or passport number.
3. Information that could facilitate the physical or
electronic contacting of an individual, such as a physical
address, e-mail address, phone number, or Internet Protocol (IP)
address.
4. Demographic information, such as date of birth, age,
gender, race, ethnicity, nationality, religion, or sexual
orientation.
5. Financial information.
6. Health information.
7. Information pertaining to a minor child with whom the
customer or user has a parental, legal custodianship, permanent
guardianship, or foster parent relationship.
8. Geolocation information.
9. Information relating to individual customer user
behavior, such as Internet browsing history, application usage
history, content of communications, and origin and destination
IP addresses of all traffic.
10. Device identifiers, such as a media access control
(MAC) address or Internet mobile equipment identity (IMEI).
11. Any other information concerning a customer or user of
the customer’s subscription which is collected or made available
and is maintained in personally identifiable form.
(d) “Deidentified” means the details making it possible to
recognize a particular person have been removed from a record,
piece of information, or data set.
(e) “Internet service provider” means a person engaged in
providing broadband service. This only includes the extent of
the person’s business engaged in or supporting the provision of
broadband services.
(2) Effective July 1, 2019:
(a) An Internet service provider may not use, disclose,
sell, or permit external access to customer personal
information, except as provided in this section or other law.
(b) An Internet service provider may use, disclose, sell,
or permit access to customer personal information if the
customer gives the Internet service provider prior opt-in
consent. The customer may revoke this consent at any time. The
mechanism provided by the Internet service provider for
requesting and revoking consent under this subsection must be
clear and conspicuous, not misleading, in the language primarily
used to conduct business with the customer, and made available
to the customer at no additional cost. The mechanism must also
be persistently available on or through the Internet service
provider’s Internet website or mobile application if it provides
such a site or application for account management purposes. If
the Internet service provider does not have an Internet website,
it must provide a persistently available mechanism by another
means, such as a toll-free telephone number. The customer’s
granting, denial, or withdrawal of consent must be given effect
promptly and remain in effect until the customer revokes or
limits the granting, denial, or withdrawal of consent.
(c) An Internet service provider may not retain a
customer’s information for longer than is reasonably necessary
to accomplish the purposes for which the information was
collected, unless the information is aggregate customer
information or is otherwise required by this section or other
law.
(d) An Internet service provider must implement and
maintain reasonable security procedures and practices
appropriate to the nature of the information to protect customer
personal information from unauthorized use, disclosure, access,
destruction, or modification.
(3) The request for consent specified in paragraph (2)(b)
must disclose to the customer all of the following:
(a) The types of customer personal information for which
the Internet service provider is seeking customer approval to
use, disclose, sell, or permit external access.
(b) The purposes for which the customer personal
information will be used.
(c) The categories of entities to which the Internet
service provider intends to disclose, sell, or permit access to
the customer personal information.
(4) An Internet service provider may not:
(a) Refuse to serve a customer, or in any way limit or
reduce services to a customer, who does not provide consent
under paragraph (2)(b).
(b) Charge a customer a penalty, or penalize a customer in
any way, or offer a customer a discount or another benefit based
on the customer’s decision to provide or not provide consent
under paragraph (2)(b).
(c) Refuse or fail to disclose the customer personal
information of a customer upon affirmative written request from
such customer, to any person designated by such customer.
(5) An Internet service provider may use, disclose, or
permit access to customer personal information without customer
consent, unless otherwise prohibited by law, only to the extent
necessary to achieve the stated purpose in one or more of the
following circumstances:
(a) To provide the broadband service from which the
information is derived, or business functions necessary for
providing that service.
(b) To comply with a legal process or other law, court
order, administrative order, or by order of the commission.
(c) To initiate, render, bill for, and collect payment for
broadband service.
(d) To protect the rights or property of the Internet
service, or to protect customers of those services and other
carriers from fraudulent, abusive, or unlawful use of or
subscription to those services.
(e) To provide location information concerning the customer
as follows:
1. To a public safety answering point, emergency medical
service provider, or emergency dispatch provider, public safety,
fire service, or law enforcement official, or hospital emergency
or trauma care facility, in order to respond to the customer’s
request for emergency services.
2. To inform the customer’s legal guardian, members of the
customer’s family, or a person reasonably believed by the
Internet service provider to be a close personal friend of the
customer of the customer’s location in an emergency situation
that involves the risk of death or life-threatening harm.
3. To providers of information or database management
services solely for purposes of assisting in the delivery of
emergency services in response to an emergency.
(6) This section does not restrict an Internet service
provider from generating an aggregate customer information
dataset using customer personal information, or using,
disclosing, selling, or permitting access to the aggregate
customer information dataset it generated.
(7) Unless otherwise prohibited by law, an Internet service
provider may use, disclose, or permit access to customer
personal information to advertise or market the provider’s
communications-related services to the customer, provided that
the customer may opt out of that use, disclosure, or access at
any time, and the customer is notified of the right to opt out
in a manner that is clear and conspicuous, not misleading, in
the language primarily used to conduct business with the
consumer, persistently available, and made available to the
customer at no additional cost.
(8) An Internet service provider may employ any lawful
security measures to comply with the requirements of this
section.
(9) The requirements of this section apply to Internet
service providers operating within this state when providing
broadband service to their customers who are residents of and
physically located in this state. Any waiver by the customer of
the provisions of this section is against the public policy of
this state and shall be void and unenforceable.
(10) The commission shall:
(a) Administer and enforce this section and any rules
adopted pursuant to this section.
(b) Impose and collect penalties relating to violations of
this section pursuant to s. 364.285.
(c) Adopt rules necessary to implement this section.
Section 2. This act shall take effect July 1, 2018.