A bill to be entitled                      
An act relating to the Florida False Claims Act;
amending s. 68.084, F.S.; authorizing the Attorney
General, on behalf of the Department of Legal Affairs,
to voluntarily dismiss certain civil actions;
providing an exception; providing that the department
may not dismiss such actions on behalf of the state at
a later date under certain circumstances; amending s.
68.087, F.S.; deleting a provision prohibiting a court
from having jurisdiction over an action brought by an
employee or former employee of state government;
providing an effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:

Section 1. Paragraph (a) of subsection (2) and subsection
(3) of section 68.084, Florida Statutes, are amended to read:
68.084 Rights of the parties in civil actions.—
(2)(a) The department, or the Attorney General, as head of
the department, may at any point voluntarily dismiss the action
notwithstanding the objections of the person initiating the
action, unless the department elected not to proceed with the
action and the person who initiated the action proceeds with the
action under subsection (3).
(3) If the department elects not to proceed with the
action, the person who initiated the action has the right to
conduct the action. If the Attorney General, as head of the
department, or the Chief Financial Officer, as head of the
Department of Financial Services, so requests, it shall be
served with copies of all pleadings and motions filed in the
action along with copies of all deposition transcripts at the
requesting department’s expense. When a person proceeds with the
action, the court, without limiting the rights of the person
initiating the action, may nevertheless permit the department to
intervene and take over the action, except to dismiss the
action, on behalf of the state at a later date upon showing of
good cause.
Section 2. Subsection (4) of section 68.087, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
68.087 Exemptions to civil actions.—
(4) No court shall have jurisdiction over an action where
the person bringing the action under s. 68.083(2) is:
(a) acting as an attorney for state government; or
(b) An employee or former employee of state government, and
the action is based, in whole or in part, upon information
obtained in the course or scope of government employment.
Section 3. This act shall take effect July 1, 2018.