A bill to be entitled                      
An act relating to mental health and substance abuse
services for veterans; amending ss. 394.463 and
397.6758, F.S.; requiring a veteran who is
involuntarily examined under the Baker Act or
involuntarily assessed under the Hal S. Marchman
Alcohol and Other Drug Services Act to be released to
a United States Department of Veterans Affairs
hospital to ensure coordination of treatment;
providing an effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:

Section 1. Paragraph (g) of subsection (2) of section
394.463, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
394.463 Involuntary examination.—
(2) INVOLUNTARY EXAMINATION.—
(g) The examination period must be for up to 72 hours. For
a minor, the examination shall be initiated within 12 hours
after the patient’s arrival at the facility. Within the
examination period or, if the examination period ends on a
weekend or holiday, no later than the next working day
thereafter, one of the following actions must be taken, based on
the individual needs of the patient:
1. The patient shall be released, unless he or she is
charged with a crime, in which case the patient shall be
returned to the custody of a law enforcement officer;
2. The patient shall be released, subject to subparagraph
1., for voluntary outpatient treatment;
3. The patient, unless he or she is charged with a crime,
shall be asked to give express and informed consent to placement
as a voluntary patient and, if such consent is given, the
patient shall be admitted as a voluntary patient; or
4. A petition for involuntary services shall be filed in
the circuit court if inpatient treatment is deemed necessary or
with the criminal county court, as defined in s. 394.4655(1), as
applicable. When inpatient treatment is deemed necessary, the
least restrictive treatment consistent with the optimum
improvement of the patient’s condition shall be made available.
When a petition is to be filed for involuntary outpatient
placement, it shall be filed by one of the petitioners specified
in s. 394.4655(4)(a). A petition for involuntary inpatient
placement shall be filed by the facility administrator; or.
5. Notwithstanding s. 394.4672, a patient who is a veteran
as defined in s. 1.01, must be released to a United States
Department of Veterans Affairs hospital to ensure coordination
of treatment.
Section 2. Section 397.6758, Florida Statutes, is amended
to read:
397.6758 Release of individual from protective custody,
emergency admission, involuntary assessment, involuntary
treatment, and alternative involuntary assessment of a minor.—An
individual involuntarily admitted to a licensed service provider
may be released without further order of the court only by a
qualified professional in a hospital, a detoxification facility,
an addictions receiving facility, or any less restrictive
treatment component. Notice of the release must be provided to
the applicant in the case of an emergency admission or an
alternative involuntary assessment for a minor, or to the
petitioner and the court if the involuntary assessment or
treatment was court ordered.
(1) In the case of a minor, the release must be:
(a)(1) To the individual’s parent, legal guardian, or legal
custodian or the authorized designee thereof;
(b)(2) To the Department of Children and Families pursuant
to s. 39.401; or
(c)(3) To the Department of Juvenile Justice pursuant to s.
984.13.
(2) In the case of a veteran as defined in s. 1.01, the
release must be to a United States Department of Veterans
Affairs hospital to ensure coordination of treatment.
Section 3. This act shall take effect July 1, 2018.