A bill to be entitled                      
An act relating to sentencing for sexual offenders and
sexual predators; amending s. 775.21, F.S.; redefining
the terms “permanent residence,” “temporary
residence,” and “transient residence” by decreasing
the amount of days a person abides, lodges, or resides
in a certain place to qualify for that type of
residency category; revising existing criminal
penalties for sexual predators to require mandatory
minimum terms of community control with electronic
monitoring for first, second, and third and subsequent
violations of specified offenses; amending s.
943.0435, F.S.; revising existing criminal penalties
for sexual offenders to require mandatory minimum
terms of community control with electronic monitoring
for first, second, and third and subsequent violations
of specified offenses; reenacting s. 775.25, F.S.,
relating to prosecutions for certain acts or
omissions, to incorporate the amendments made to ss.
775.21 and 943.0435, F.S., in references thereto;
reenacting ss. 944.606(1)(d), 985.481(1)(d), and
985.4815(1)(f), F.S., relating to sexual offenders and
required notifications upon release, sexual offenders
adjudicated delinquent and required notifications upon
release, and notification to the Department of Law
Enforcement of information on juvenile sexual
offenders, respectively, to incorporate the amendment
made to s. 775.21, F.S., in references thereto;
providing an effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:

Section 1. Paragraphs (k), (n), and (o) of subsection (2)
and paragraph (a) of subsection (10) of section 775.21, Florida
Statutes, are amended, and paragraph (d) of subsection (5) and
paragraphs (g) and (i) of subsection (6) of that section are
republished, to read:
775.21 The Florida Sexual Predators Act.—
(2) DEFINITIONS.—As used in this section, the term:
(k) “Permanent residence” means a place where the person
abides, lodges, or resides for 3 5 or more consecutive days.
(n) “Temporary residence” means a place where the person
abides, lodges, or resides, including, but not limited to,
vacation, business, or personal travel destinations in or out of
this state, for a period of 3 5 or more days in the aggregate
during any calendar year and which is not the person’s permanent
address or, for a person whose permanent residence is not in
this state, a place where the person is employed, practices a
vocation, or is enrolled as a student for any period of time in
this state.
(o) “Transient residence” means a county where a person
lives, remains, or is located for a period of 3 5 or more days
in the aggregate during a calendar year and which is not the
person’s permanent or temporary address. The term includes, but
is not limited to, a place where the person sleeps or seeks
shelter and a location that has no specific street address.
(5) SEXUAL PREDATOR DESIGNATION.—An offender is designated
as a sexual predator as follows:
(d) A person who establishes or maintains a residence in
this state and who has not been designated as a sexual predator
by a court of this state but who has been designated as a sexual
predator, as a sexually violent predator, or by another sexual
offender designation in another state or jurisdiction and was,
as a result of such designation, subjected to registration or
community or public notification, or both, or would be if the
person was a resident of that state or jurisdiction, without
regard to whether the person otherwise meets the criteria for
registration as a sexual offender, shall register in the manner
provided in s. 943.0435 or s. 944.607 and shall be subject to
community and public notification as provided in s. 943.0435 or
s. 944.607. A person who meets the criteria of this section is
subject to the requirements and penalty provisions of s.
943.0435 or s. 944.607 until the person provides the department
with an order issued by the court that designated the person as
a sexual predator, as a sexually violent predator, or by another
sexual offender designation in the state or jurisdiction in
which the order was issued which states that such designation
has been removed or demonstrates to the department that such
designation, if not imposed by a court, has been removed by
operation of law or court order in the state or jurisdiction in
which the designation was made, and provided such person no
longer meets the criteria for registration as a sexual offender
under the laws of this state.
(6) REGISTRATION.—
(g)1. Each time a sexual predator’s driver license or
identification card is subject to renewal, and, without regard
to the status of the predator’s driver license or identification
card, within 48 hours after any change of the predator’s
residence or change in the predator’s name by reason of marriage
or other legal process, the predator shall report in person to a
driver license office and is subject to the requirements
specified in paragraph (f). The Department of Highway Safety and
Motor Vehicles shall forward to the department and to the
Department of Corrections all photographs and information
provided by sexual predators. Notwithstanding the restrictions
set forth in s. 322.142, the Department of Highway Safety and
Motor Vehicles may release a reproduction of a color-photograph
or digital-image license to the Department of Law Enforcement
for purposes of public notification of sexual predators as
provided in this section. A sexual predator who is unable to
secure or update a driver license or an identification card with
the Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles as provided
in paragraph (f) and this paragraph shall also report any change
of the predator’s residence or change in the predator’s name by
reason of marriage or other legal process within 48 hours after
the change to the sheriff’s office in the county where the
predator resides or is located and provide confirmation that he
or she reported such information to the Department of Highway
Safety and Motor Vehicles. The reporting requirements under this
subparagraph do not negate the requirement for a sexual predator
to obtain a Florida driver license or identification card as
required by this section.
2.a. A sexual predator who vacates a permanent, temporary,
or transient residence and fails to establish or maintain
another permanent, temporary, or transient residence shall,
within 48 hours after vacating the permanent, temporary, or
transient residence, report in person to the sheriff’s office of
the county in which he or she is located. The sexual predator
shall specify the date upon which he or she intends to or did
vacate such residence. The sexual predator shall provide or
update all of the registration information required under
paragraph (a). The sexual predator shall provide an address for
the residence or other place that he or she is or will be
located during the time in which he or she fails to establish or
maintain a permanent or temporary residence.
b. A sexual predator shall report in person at the
sheriff’s office in the county in which he or she is located
within 48 hours after establishing a transient residence and
thereafter must report in person every 30 days to the sheriff’s
office in the county in which he or she is located while
maintaining a transient residence. The sexual predator must
provide the addresses and locations where he or she maintains a
transient residence. Each sheriff’s office shall establish
procedures for reporting transient residence information and
provide notice to transient registrants to report transient
residence information as required in this sub-subparagraph.
Reporting to the sheriff’s office as required by this sub
subparagraph does not exempt registrants from any reregistration
requirement. The sheriff may coordinate and enter into
agreements with police departments and other governmental
entities to facilitate additional reporting sites for transient
residence registration required in this sub-subparagraph. The
sheriff’s office shall, within 2 business days, electronically
submit and update all information provided by the sexual
predator to the department.
3. A sexual predator who remains at a permanent, temporary,
or transient residence after reporting his or her intent to
vacate such residence shall, within 48 hours after the date upon
which the predator indicated he or she would or did vacate such
residence, report in person to the sheriff’s office to which he
or she reported pursuant to subparagraph 2. for the purpose of
reporting his or her address at such residence. When the sheriff
receives the report, the sheriff shall promptly convey the
information to the department. An offender who makes a report as
required under subparagraph 2. but fails to make a report as
required under this subparagraph commits a felony of the second
degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082, s. 775.083, or s.
775.084.
4. The failure of a sexual predator who maintains a
transient residence to report in person to the sheriff’s office
every 30 days as required by sub-subparagraph 2.b. is punishable
as provided in subsection (10).
5.a. A sexual predator shall register all electronic mail
addresses and Internet identifiers, and each Internet
identifier’s corresponding website homepage or application
software name, with the department through the department’s
online system or in person at the sheriff’s office within 48
hours after using such electronic mail addresses and Internet
identifiers. If the sexual predator is in the custody or
control, or under the supervision, of the Department of
Corrections, he or she must report all electronic mail addresses
and Internet identifiers, and each Internet identifier’s
corresponding website homepage or application software name, to
the Department of Corrections before using such electronic mail
addresses or Internet identifiers. If the sexual predator is in
the custody or control, or under the supervision, of the
Department of Juvenile Justice, he or she must report all
electronic mail addresses and Internet identifiers, and each
Internet identifier’s corresponding website homepage or
application software name, to the Department of Juvenile Justice
before using such electronic mail addresses or Internet
identifiers.
b. A sexual predator shall register all changes to home
telephone numbers and cellular telephone numbers, including
added and deleted numbers, all changes to employment
information, and all changes in status related to enrollment,
volunteering, or employment at institutions of higher education,
through the department’s online system; in person at the
sheriff’s office; in person at the Department of Corrections if
the sexual predator is in the custody or control, or under the
supervision, of the Department of Corrections; or in person at
the Department of Juvenile Justice if the sexual predator is in
the custody or control, or under the supervision, of the
Department of Juvenile Justice. All changes required to be
reported in this sub-subparagraph shall be reported within 48
hours after the change.
c. The department shall establish an online system through
which sexual predators may securely access, submit, and update
all electronic mail addresses; Internet identifiers and each
Internet identifier’s corresponding website homepage or
application software name; home telephone numbers and cellular
telephone numbers; employment information; and institution of
higher education information.
(i) A sexual predator who intends to establish a permanent,
temporary, or transient residence in another state or
jurisdiction other than the State of Florida shall report in
person to the sheriff of the county of current residence within
48 hours before the date he or she intends to leave this state
to establish residence in another state or jurisdiction or at
least 21 days before the date he or she intends to travel if the
intended residence of 5 days or more is outside of the United
States. Any travel that is not known by the sexual predator 21
days before the departure date must be reported to the sheriff’s
office as soon as possible before departure. The sexual predator
shall provide to the sheriff the address, municipality, county,
state, and country of intended residence. For international
travel, the sexual predator shall also provide travel
information, including, but not limited to, expected departure
and return dates, flight number, airport of departure, cruise
port of departure, or any other means of intended travel. The
sheriff shall promptly provide to the department the information
received from the sexual predator. The department shall notify
the statewide law enforcement agency, or a comparable agency, in
the intended state, jurisdiction, or country of residence of the
sexual predator’s intended residence. The failure of a sexual
predator to provide his or her intended place of residence is
punishable as provided in subsection (10).
(10) PENALTIES.—
(a) Except as otherwise specifically provided, a sexual
predator who fails to register; who fails, after registration,
to maintain, acquire, or renew a driver license or an
identification card; who fails to provide required location
information; who fails to provide electronic mail addresses,
Internet identifiers, and each Internet identifier’s
corresponding website homepage or application software name; who
fails to provide all home telephone numbers and cellular
telephone numbers, employment information, change in status at
an institution of higher education, or change-of-name
information; who fails to make a required report in connection
with vacating a permanent residence; who fails to reregister as
required; who fails to respond to any address verification
correspondence from the department within 3 weeks of the date of
the correspondence; who knowingly provides false registration
information by act or omission; or who otherwise fails, by act
or omission, to comply with the requirements of this section
commits a felony of the third degree, punishable as provided in
s. 775.082, s. 775.083, or s. 775.084, and shall be sentenced:
1. For a first offense committed on or after July 1, 2018,
to a mandatory minimum term of 6 months of community control, as
defined in s. 948.001, with electronic monitoring.
2. For a second offense committed on or after July 1, 2018,
to a mandatory minimum term of 1 year of community control, as
defined in s. 948.001, with electronic monitoring.
3. For a third or subsequent offense committed on or after
July 1, 2018, to a mandatory minimum term of 2 years of
community control, as defined in s. 948.001, with electronic
monitoring.
Section 2. Paragraph (a) of subsection (9) of section
943.0435, Florida Statutes, is amended, and paragraph (f) of
subsection (1), paragraph (d) of subsection (4), and subsection
(7) of that section are republished, to read:
943.0435 Sexual offenders required to register with the
department; penalty.—
(1) As used in this section, the term:
(f) “Permanent residence,” “temporary residence,” and
“transient residence” have the same meaning as provided in s.
775.21.
(4)
(d) The failure of a sexual offender who maintains a
transient residence to report in person to the sheriff’s office
every 30 days as required in subparagraph (b)2. is punishable as
provided in subsection (9).
(7) A sexual offender who intends to establish a permanent,
temporary, or transient residence in another state or
jurisdiction other than the State of Florida shall report in
person to the sheriff of the county of current residence within
48 hours before the date he or she intends to leave this state
to establish residence in another state or jurisdiction or at
least 21 days before the date he or she intends to travel if the
intended residence of 5 days or more is outside of the United
States. Any travel that is not known by the sexual offender 21
days before the departure date must be reported in person to the
sheriff’s office as soon as possible before departure. The
sexual offender shall provide to the sheriff the address,
municipality, county, state, and country of intended residence.
For international travel, the sexual offender shall also provide
travel information, including, but not limited to, expected
departure and return dates, flight number, airport of departure,
cruise port of departure, or any other means of intended travel.
The sheriff shall promptly provide to the department the
information received from the sexual offender. The department
shall notify the statewide law enforcement agency, or a
comparable agency, in the intended state, jurisdiction, or
country of residence of the sexual offender’s intended
residence. The failure of a sexual offender to provide his or
her intended place of residence is punishable as provided in
subsection (9).
(9)(a) Except as otherwise specifically provided, a sexual
offender who does not comply with the requirements of this
section commits a felony of the third degree, punishable as
provided in s. 775.082, s. 775.083, or s. 775.084, and shall be
sentenced:
1. For a first offense committed on or after July 1, 2018,
to a mandatory minimum term of 6 months of community control, as
defined in s. 948.001, with electronic monitoring.
2. For a second offense committed on or after July 1, 2018,
to a mandatory minimum term of 1 year of community control, as
defined in s. 948.001, with electronic monitoring.
3. For a third or subsequent offense committed on or after
July 1, 2018, to a mandatory minimum term of 2 years of
community control, as defined in s. 948.001, with electronic
monitoring.
Section 3. For the purpose of incorporating the amendments
made by this act to sections 775.21 and 943.0435, Florida
Statutes, in references thereto, section 775.25, Florida
Statutes, is reenacted to read:
775.25 Prosecutions for acts or omissions.—A sexual
predator or sexual offender who commits any act or omission in
violation of s. 775.21, s. 943.0435, s. 944.605, s. 944.606, s.
944.607, or former s. 947.177 may be prosecuted for the act or
omission in the county in which the act or omission was
committed, in the county of the last registered address of the
sexual predator or sexual offender, in the county in which the
conviction occurred for the offense or offenses that meet the
criteria for designating a person as a sexual predator or sexual
offender, in the county where the sexual predator or sexual
offender was released from incarceration, or in the county of
the intended address of the sexual predator or sexual offender
as reported by the predator or offender prior to his or her
release from incarceration. In addition, a sexual predator may
be prosecuted for any such act or omission in the county in
which he or she was designated a sexual predator.
Section 4. For the purpose of incorporating the amendment
made by this act to section 775.21, Florida Statutes, in a
reference thereto, paragraph (d) of subsection (1) of section
944.606, Florida Statutes, is reenacted to read:
944.606 Sexual offenders; notification upon release.—
(1) As used in this section, the term:
(d) “Permanent residence,” “temporary residence,” and
“transient residence” have the same meaning as provided in s.
775.21.
Section 5. For the purpose of incorporating the amendment
made by this act to section 775.21, Florida Statutes, in a
reference thereto, paragraph (d) of subsection (1) of section
985.481, Florida Statutes, is reenacted to read:
985.481 Sexual offenders adjudicated delinquent;
notification upon release.—
(1) As used in this section:
(d) “Permanent residence,” “temporary residence,” and
“transient residence” have the same meaning as provided in s.
775.21.
Section 6. For the purpose of incorporating the amendment
made by this act to section 775.21, Florida Statutes, in a
reference thereto, paragraph (f) of subsection (1) of section
985.4815, Florida Statutes, is reenacted to read:
985.4815 Notification to Department of Law Enforcement of
information on juvenile sexual offenders.—
(1) As used in this section, the term:
(f) “Permanent residence,” “temporary residence,” and
“transient residence” have the same meaning as provided in s.
775.21.
Section 7. This act shall take effect July 1, 2018.