A bill to be entitled                      
An act relating to condominium associations; amending
s. 718.111, F.S.; deleting a restriction on attorney
representation; revising record retention policies;
revising the list of documents that the association is
required to post online; limiting an association’s
liability for inadvertent disclosure of protected or
restricted information; providing that the failure of
an association to post certain information is not
sufficient, in and of itself, to invalidate any action
or decision of the association; amending s. 718.112,
F.S.; removing board term limits; providing an
effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:

Section 1. Subsections (3) and (12) of section 718.111,
Florida Statutes, are amended to read:
718.111 The association.—
(3) POWER TO MANAGE CONDOMINIUM PROPERTY AND TO CONTRACT,
SUE, AND BE SUED; CONFLICT OF INTEREST.—
(a) The association may contract, sue, or be sued with
respect to the exercise or nonexercise of its powers. For these
purposes, the powers of the association include, but are not
limited to, the maintenance, management, and operation of the
condominium property. After control of the association is
obtained by unit owners other than the developer, the
association may institute, maintain, settle, or appeal actions
or hearings in its name on behalf of all unit owners concerning
matters of common interest to most or all unit owners,
including, but not limited to, the common elements; the roof and
structural components of a building or other improvements;
mechanical, electrical, and plumbing elements serving an
improvement or a building; representations of the developer
pertaining to any existing or proposed commonly used facilities;
and protesting ad valorem taxes on commonly used facilities and
on units; and may defend actions in eminent domain or bring
inverse condemnation actions. If the association has the
authority to maintain a class action, the association may be
joined in an action as representative of that class with
reference to litigation and disputes involving the matters for
which the association could bring a class action. Nothing herein
limits any statutory or common-law right of any individual unit
owner or class of unit owners to bring any action without
participation by the association which may otherwise be
available.
(b) An association may not hire an attorney who represents
the management company of the association.
(12) OFFICIAL RECORDS.—
(a) From the inception of the association, The association
shall maintain each of the following items, if applicable, which
constitutes the official records of the association:
1. A copy of the plans, permits, warranties, and other
items provided by the developer pursuant to s. 718.301(4).
2. A photocopy of the recorded declaration of condominium
of each condominium operated by the association and each
amendment to each declaration.
3. A photocopy of the recorded bylaws of the association
and each amendment to the bylaws.
4. A certified copy of the articles of incorporation of the
association, or other documents creating the association, and
each amendment thereto.
5. A copy of the current rules of the association.
6. A book or books that contain the minutes of all meetings
of the association, the board of administration, and the unit
owners, which minutes must be retained for at least 7 years.
7. A current roster of all unit owners and their mailing
addresses, unit identifications, voting certifications, and, if
known, telephone numbers. The association shall also maintain
the e-mail electronic mailing addresses and facsimile numbers of
unit owners consenting to receive notice by electronic
transmission. The e-mail electronic mailing addresses and
facsimile numbers are not accessible to unit owners if consent
to receive notice by electronic transmission is not provided in
accordance with sub-subparagraph (c)3.e. However, the
association is not liable for an inadvertent disclosure of the
electronic mail address or facsimile number for receiving
electronic transmission of notices.
8. All current insurance policies of the association and
condominiums operated by the association.
9. A current copy of any management agreement, lease, or
other contract to which the association is a party or under
which the association or the unit owners have an obligation or
responsibility.
10. Bills of sale or transfer for all property owned by the
association.
11. Accounting records for the association and separate
accounting records for each condominium that the association
operates. All accounting records must be maintained for at least
7 years. Any person who knowingly or intentionally defaces or
destroys such records, or who knowingly or intentionally fails
to create or maintain such records, with the intent of causing
harm to the association or one or more of its members, is
personally subject to a civil penalty pursuant to s.
718.501(1)(d). The accounting records must include, but are not
limited to:
a. Accurate, itemized, and detailed records of all receipts
and expenditures.
b. A current account and a monthly, bimonthly, or quarterly
statement of the account for each unit designating the name of
the unit owner, the due date and amount of each assessment, the
amount paid on the account, and the balance due.
c. All audits, reviews, accounting statements, and
financial reports of the association or condominium.
d. All contracts for work to be performed. Bids for work to
be performed are also considered official records and must be
maintained by the association for a period of 1 year after the
date of receipt.
12. Ballots, sign-in sheets, voting proxies, and all other
papers relating to voting by unit owners, which must be
maintained for 1 year from the date of the election, vote, or
meeting to which the document relates, notwithstanding paragraph
(b).
13. All rental records if the association is acting as
agent for the rental of condominium units.
14. A copy of the current question and answer sheet as
described in s. 718.504.
15. All other written records of the association not
specifically included in the foregoing which are related to the
operation of the association.
16. A copy of the inspection report as described in s.
718.301(4)(p).
17. Bids for materials, equipment, or services, which must
be maintained by the association for a period of 1 year after
the date of receipt.
(b) The official records specified in subparagraphs (a)1.
6. must be permanently maintained from the inception of the
association. All other official records of the association must
be maintained within the state for at least 7 years, unless
otherwise provided by law. The records of the association shall
be made available to a unit owner within 45 miles of the
condominium property or within the county in which the
condominium property is located within 5 working days after
receipt of a written request by the board or its designee.
However, such distance requirement does not apply to an
association governing a timeshare condominium. This paragraph
may be complied with by having a copy of the official records of
the association available for inspection or copying on the
condominium property or association property, or the association
may offer the option of making the records available to a unit
owner electronically via the Internet or by allowing the records
to be viewed in electronic format on a computer screen and
printed upon request. The association is not responsible for the
use or misuse of the information provided to an association
member or his or her authorized representative pursuant to the
compliance requirements of this chapter unless the association
has an affirmative duty not to disclose such information
pursuant to this chapter.
(c)1. The official records of the association are open to
inspection by any association member or the authorized
representative of such member at all reasonable times. The right
to inspect the records includes the right to make or obtain
copies, at the reasonable expense, if any, of the member or
authorized representative of such member. A renter of a unit has
a right to inspect and copy the association’s bylaws and rules.
The association may adopt reasonable rules regarding the
frequency, time, location, notice, and manner of record
inspections and copying. The failure of an association to
provide the records within 10 working days after receipt of a
written request creates a rebuttable presumption that the
association willfully failed to comply with this paragraph. A
unit owner who is denied access to official records is entitled
to the actual damages or minimum damages for the association’s
willful failure to comply. Minimum damages are $50 per calendar
day for up to 10 days, beginning on the 11th working day after
receipt of the written request. The failure to allow permit
inspection entitles any person prevailing in an enforcement
action to recover reasonable attorney fees from the person in
control of the records who, directly or indirectly, knowingly
denied access to the records.
2. Any person who knowingly or intentionally defaces or
destroys accounting records that are required by this chapter to
be maintained during the period for which such records are
required to be maintained, or who knowingly or intentionally
fails to create or maintain accounting records that are required
to be created or maintained, with the intent of causing harm to
the association or one or more of its members, is personally
subject to a civil penalty pursuant to s. 718.501(1)(d).
3. The association shall maintain an adequate number of
copies of the declaration, articles of incorporation, bylaws,
and rules, and all amendments to each of the foregoing, as well
as the question and answer sheet as described in s. 718.504 and
year-end financial information required under this section, on
the condominium property to ensure their availability to unit
owners and prospective purchasers, and may charge its actual
costs for preparing and furnishing these documents to those
requesting the documents. An association shall allow a member or
his or her authorized representative to use a portable device,
including a smartphone, tablet, portable scanner, or any other
technology capable of scanning or taking photographs, to make an
electronic copy of the official records in lieu of the
association’s providing the member or his or her authorized
representative with a copy of such records. The association may
not charge a member or his or her authorized representative for
the use of a portable device. Notwithstanding this paragraph,
the following records are not accessible to unit owners:
a. Any record protected by the lawyer-client privilege as
described in s. 90.502 and any record protected by the work
product privilege, including a record prepared by an association
attorney or prepared at the attorney’s express direction, which
reflects a mental impression, conclusion, litigation strategy,
or legal theory of the attorney or the association, and which
was prepared exclusively for civil or criminal litigation or for
adversarial administrative proceedings, or which was prepared in
anticipation of such litigation or proceedings until the
conclusion of the litigation or proceedings.
b. Information obtained by an association in connection
with the approval of the lease, sale, or other transfer of a
unit.
c. Personnel records of association or management company
employees, including, but not limited to, disciplinary, payroll,
health, and insurance records. For purposes of this sub
subparagraph, the term “personnel records” does not include
written employment agreements with an association employee or
management company, or budgetary or financial records that
indicate the compensation paid to an association employee.
d. Medical records of unit owners.
e. Social security numbers, driver license numbers, credit
card numbers, e-mail addresses, telephone numbers, facsimile
numbers, emergency contact information, addresses of a unit
owner other than as provided to fulfill the association’s notice
requirements, and other personal identifying information of any
person, excluding the person’s name, unit designation, mailing
address, property address, and any address, e-mail address, or
facsimile number provided to the association to fulfill the
association’s notice requirements. Notwithstanding the
restrictions in this sub-subparagraph, an association may print
and distribute to parcel owners a directory containing the name,
parcel address, and all telephone numbers of each parcel owner.
However, an owner may exclude his or her telephone numbers from
the directory by so requesting in writing to the association. An
owner may consent in writing to the disclosure of other contact
information described in this sub-subparagraph. The association
is not liable for the inadvertent disclosure of information that
is protected under this sub-subparagraph if the information is
included in an official record of the association and is
voluntarily provided by an owner and not requested by the
association.
f. Electronic security measures that are used by the
association to safeguard data, including passwords.
g. The software and operating system used by the
association which allow the manipulation of data, even if the
owner owns a copy of the same software used by the association.
The data is part of the official records of the association.
(d) The association shall prepare a question and answer
sheet as described in s. 718.504, and shall update it annually.
(e)1. The association or its authorized agent is not
required to provide a prospective purchaser or lienholder with
information about the condominium or the association other than
information or documents required by this chapter to be made
available or disclosed. The association or its authorized agent
may charge a reasonable fee to the prospective purchaser,
lienholder, or the current unit owner for providing good faith
responses to requests for information by or on behalf of a
prospective purchaser or lienholder, other than that required by
law, if the fee does not exceed $150 plus the reasonable cost of
photocopying and any attorney attorney’s fees incurred by the
association in connection with the response.
2. An association and its authorized agent are not liable
for providing such information in good faith pursuant to a
written request if the person providing the information includes
a written statement in substantially the following form: “The
responses herein are made in good faith and to the best of my
ability as to their accuracy.”
(f) An outgoing board or committee member must relinquish
all official records and property of the association in his or
her possession or under his or her control to the incoming board
within 5 days after the election. The division shall impose a
civil penalty as set forth in s. 718.501(1)(d)6. against an
outgoing board or committee member who willfully and knowingly
fails to relinquish such records and property.
(g)1. By July 1, 2018, an association with 150 or more
units which does not manage timeshare units shall post digital
copies of the documents specified in subparagraph 2. on its
website.
a. The association’s website must be:
(I) An independent website or web portal wholly owned and
operated by the association; or
(II) A website or web portal operated by a third-party
provider with whom the association owns, leases, rents, or
otherwise obtains the right to operate a web page, subpage, web
portal, or collection of subpages or web portals dedicated to
the association’s activities and on which required notices,
records, and documents may be posted by the association.
b. The association’s website must be accessible through the
Internet and must contain a subpage, web portal, or other
protected electronic location that is inaccessible to the
general public and accessible only to unit owners and employees
of the association.
c. Upon a unit owner’s written request, the association
must provide the unit owner with a username and password and
access to the protected sections of the association’s website
that contain any notices, records, or documents that must be
electronically provided.
2. A current copy of the following documents must be posted
in digital format on the association’s website:
a. The recorded declaration of condominium of each
condominium operated by the association and each amendment to
each declaration.
b. The recorded bylaws of the association and each
amendment to the bylaws.
c. The articles of incorporation of the association, or
other documents creating the association, and each amendment
thereto. The copy posted pursuant to this sub-subparagraph must
be a copy of the articles of incorporation filed with the
Department of State.
d. The rules of the association, if any.
e. A list of all executory contracts or documents Any
management agreement, lease, or other contract to which the
association is a party or under which the association or the
unit owners have an obligation or responsibility and, after
bidding for the related materials, equipment, or services has
closed, a list of bids received by the association within the
past year. Summaries of bids for materials, equipment, or
services which exceed $2,500 must be maintained on the website
for 1 year.
f. The annual budget required by s. 718.112(2)(f) and any
proposed budget to be considered at the annual meeting.
g. The financial report required by subsection (13) and any
proposed financial report to be considered at a meeting.
h. The certification of each director required by s.
718.112(2)(d)4.b.
i. All contracts or transactions between the association
and any director, officer, corporation, firm, or association
that is not an affiliated condominium association or any other
entity in which an association director is also a director or
officer and financially interested.
j. Any contract or document regarding a conflict of
interest or possible conflict of interest as provided in ss.
468.436(2)(b)6. and 718.3027(3) ss. 468.436(2) and 718.3026(3).
k. The notice of any unit owner meeting and the agenda for
the meeting, as required by s. 718.112(2)(d)3., no later than 14
days before the meeting. The notice must be posted in plain view
on the front page of the website, or on a separate subpage of
the website labeled “Notices” which is conspicuously visible and
linked from the front page. The association must also post on
its website any document to be considered and voted on by the
owners during the meeting or any document listed on the agenda
at least 7 days before the meeting at which the document or the
information within the document will be considered.
l. Notice of any board meeting, the agenda, and any other
document required for the meeting as required by s.
718.112(2)(c), which must be posted no later than the date
required for notice pursuant to s. 718.112(2)(c).
3. The association shall ensure that the information and
records described in paragraph (c), which are not allowed
permitted to be accessible to unit owners, are not posted on the
association’s website. If protected information or information
restricted from being accessible to unit owners is included in
documents that are required to be posted on the association’s
website, the association shall ensure the information is
redacted before posting the documents online. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the association or its agent is not liable for
disclosing information that is protected or restricted pursuant
to this paragraph unless such disclosure was made with a knowing
or intentional disregard of the protected or restricted nature
of such information.
4. The failure of the association to post information
required under subparagraph 2. is not in and of itself
sufficient to invalidate any action or decision of the
association’s board or its committees.
Section 2. Paragraph (d) of subsection (2) of section
718.112, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
718.112 Bylaws.—
(2) REQUIRED PROVISIONS.—The bylaws shall provide for the
following and, if they do not do so, shall be deemed to include
the following:
(d) Unit owner meetings.—
1. An annual meeting of the unit owners must shall be held
at the location provided in the association bylaws and, if the
bylaws are silent as to the location, the meeting must shall be
held within 45 miles of the condominium property. However, such
distance requirement does not apply to an association governing
a timeshare condominium.
2. Unless the bylaws provide otherwise, a vacancy on the
board caused by the expiration of a director’s term must shall
be filled by electing a new board member, and the election must
be by secret ballot. An election is not required if the number
of vacancies equals or exceeds the number of candidates. For
purposes of this paragraph, the term “candidate” means an
eligible person who has timely submitted the written notice, as
described in sub-subparagraph 4.a., of his or her intention to
become a candidate. Except in a timeshare or nonresidential
condominium, or if the staggered term of a board member does not
expire until a later annual meeting, or if all members’ terms
would otherwise expire but there are no candidates, the terms of
all board members expire at the annual meeting, and such members
may stand for reelection unless prohibited by the bylaws. Board
members may serve 2-year terms longer than 1 year if allowed
permitted by the bylaws or articles of incorporation. A board
member may not serve more than four consecutive 2-year terms,
unless approved by an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the
total voting interests of the association or unless there are
not enough eligible candidates to fill the vacancies on the
board at the time of the vacancy. If the number of board members
whose terms expire at the annual meeting equals or exceeds the
number of candidates, the candidates become members of the board
effective upon the adjournment of the annual meeting. Unless the
bylaws provide otherwise, any remaining vacancies shall be
filled by the affirmative vote of the majority of the directors
making up the newly constituted board even if the directors
constitute less than a quorum or there is only one director. In
a residential condominium association of more than 10 units or
in a residential condominium association that does not include
timeshare units or timeshare interests, coowners of a unit may
not serve as members of the board of directors at the same time
unless they own more than one unit or unless there are not
enough eligible candidates to fill the vacancies on the board at
the time of the vacancy. A unit owner in a residential
condominium desiring to be a candidate for board membership must
comply with sub-subparagraph 4.a. and must be eligible to be a
candidate to serve on the board of directors at the time of the
deadline for submitting a notice of intent to run in order to
have his or her name listed as a proper candidate on the ballot
or to serve on the board. A person who has been suspended or
removed by the division under this chapter, or who is delinquent
in the payment of any monetary obligation due to the
association, is not eligible to be a candidate for board
membership and may not be listed on the ballot. A person who has
been convicted of any felony in this state or in a United States
District or Territorial Court, or who has been convicted of any
offense in another jurisdiction which would be considered a
felony if committed in this state, is not eligible for board
membership unless such felon’s civil rights have been restored
for at least 5 years as of the date such person seeks election
to the board. The validity of an action by the board is not
affected if it is later determined that a board member is
ineligible for board membership due to having been convicted of
a felony. This subparagraph does not limit the term of a member
of the board of a nonresidential or timeshare condominium.
3. The bylaws must provide the method of calling meetings
of unit owners, including annual meetings. Written notice must
include an agenda, must be mailed, hand delivered, or
electronically transmitted to each unit owner at least 14 days
before the annual meeting, and must be posted in a conspicuous
place on the condominium property at least 14 continuous days
before the annual meeting. Upon notice to the unit owners, the
board shall, by duly adopted rule, designate a specific location
on the condominium property or association property where all
notices of unit owner meetings must shall be posted. This
requirement does not apply if there is no condominium property
or association property for posting notices. In lieu of, or in
addition to, the physical posting of meeting notices, the
association may, by reasonable rule, adopt a procedure for
conspicuously posting and repeatedly broadcasting the notice and
the agenda on a closed-circuit cable television system serving
the condominium association. However, if broadcast notice is
used in lieu of a notice posted physically on the condominium
property, the notice and agenda must be broadcast at least four
times every broadcast hour of each day that a posted notice is
otherwise required under this section. If broadcast notice is
provided, the notice and agenda must be broadcast in a manner
and for a sufficient continuous length of time so as to allow an
average reader to observe the notice and read and comprehend the
entire content of the notice and the agenda. Unless a unit owner
waives in writing the right to receive notice of the annual
meeting, such notice must be hand delivered, mailed, or
electronically transmitted to each unit owner. Notice for
meetings and notice for all other purposes must be mailed to
each unit owner at the address last furnished to the association
by the unit owner, or hand delivered to each unit owner.
However, if a unit is owned by more than one person, the
association must provide notice to the address that the
developer identifies for that purpose and thereafter as one or
more of the owners of the unit advise the association in
writing, or if no address is given or the owners of the unit do
not agree, to the address provided on the deed of record. An
officer of the association, or the manager or other person
providing notice of the association meeting, must provide an
affidavit or United States Postal Service certificate of
mailing, to be included in the official records of the
association affirming that the notice was mailed or hand
delivered in accordance with this provision.
4. The members of the board of a residential condominium
shall be elected by written ballot or voting machine. Proxies
may not be used in electing the board in general elections or
elections to fill vacancies caused by recall, resignation, or
otherwise, unless otherwise provided in this chapter. This
subparagraph does not apply to an association governing a
timeshare condominium.
a. At least 60 days before a scheduled election, the
association shall mail, deliver, or electronically transmit, by
separate association mailing or included in another association
mailing, delivery, or transmission, including regularly
published newsletters, to each unit owner entitled to a vote, a
first notice of the date of the election. A unit owner or other
eligible person desiring to be a candidate for the board must
give written notice of his or her intent to be a candidate to
the association at least 40 days before a scheduled election.
Together with the written notice and agenda as set forth in
subparagraph 3., the association shall mail, deliver, or
electronically transmit a second notice of the election to all
unit owners entitled to vote, together with a ballot that lists
all candidates. Upon request of a candidate, an information
sheet, no larger than 8 1/2 inches by 11 inches, which must be
furnished by the candidate at least 35 days before the election,
must be included with the mailing, delivery, or transmission of
the ballot, with the costs of mailing, delivery, or electronic
transmission and copying to be borne by the association. The
association is not liable for the contents of the information
sheets prepared by the candidates. In order to reduce costs, the
association may print or duplicate the information sheets on
both sides of the paper. The division shall by rule establish
voting procedures consistent with this sub-subparagraph,
including rules establishing procedures for giving notice by
electronic transmission and rules providing for the secrecy of
ballots. Elections shall be decided by a plurality of ballots
cast. There is no quorum requirement; however, at least 20
percent of the eligible voters must cast a ballot in order to
have a valid election. A unit owner may not allow permit any
other person to vote his or her ballot, and any ballots
improperly cast are invalid. A unit owner who violates this
provision may be fined by the association in accordance with s.
718.303. A unit owner who needs assistance in casting the ballot
for the reasons stated in s. 101.051 may obtain such assistance.
The regular election must occur on the date of the annual
meeting. Notwithstanding this sub-subparagraph, an election is
not required unless more candidates file notices of intent to
run or are nominated than board vacancies exist.
b. Within 90 days after being elected or appointed to the
board of an association of a residential condominium, each newly
elected or appointed director shall certify in writing to the
secretary of the association that he or she has read the
association’s declaration of condominium, articles of
incorporation, bylaws, and current written policies; that he or
she will work to uphold such documents and policies to the best
of his or her ability; and that he or she will faithfully
discharge his or her fiduciary responsibility to the
association’s members. In lieu of this written certification,
within 90 days after being elected or appointed to the board,
the newly elected or appointed director may submit a certificate
of having satisfactorily completed the educational curriculum
administered by a division-approved condominium education
provider within 1 year before or 90 days after the date of
election or appointment. The written certification or
educational certificate is valid and does not have to be
resubmitted as long as the director serves on the board without
interruption. A director of an association of a residential
condominium who fails to timely file the written certification
or educational certificate is suspended from service on the
board until he or she complies with this sub-subparagraph. The
board may temporarily fill the vacancy during the period of
suspension. The secretary shall cause the association to retain
a director’s written certification or educational certificate
for inspection by the members for 5 years after a director’s
election or the duration of the director’s uninterrupted tenure,
whichever is longer. Failure to have such written certification
or educational certificate on file does not affect the validity
of any board action.
c. Any challenge to the election process must be commenced
within 60 days after the election results are announced.
5. Any approval by unit owners called for by this chapter
or the applicable declaration or bylaws, including, but not
limited to, the approval requirement in s. 718.111(8), must be
made at a duly noticed meeting of unit owners and is subject to
all requirements of this chapter or the applicable condominium
documents relating to unit owner decisionmaking, except that
unit owners may take action by written agreement, without
meetings, on matters for which action by written agreement
without meetings is expressly allowed by the applicable bylaws
or declaration or any law that provides for such action.
6. Unit owners may waive notice of specific meetings if
allowed by the applicable bylaws or declaration or any law.
Notice of meetings of the board of administration, unit owner
meetings, except unit owner meetings called to recall board
members under paragraph (j), and committee meetings may be given
by electronic transmission to unit owners who consent to receive
notice by electronic transmission.
7. Unit owners have the right to participate in meetings of
unit owners with reference to all designated agenda items.
However, the association may adopt reasonable rules governing
the frequency, duration, and manner of unit owner participation.
8. A unit owner may tape record or videotape a meeting of
the unit owners subject to reasonable rules adopted by the
division.
9. Unless otherwise provided in the bylaws, any vacancy
occurring on the board before the expiration of a term may be
filled by the affirmative vote of the majority of the remaining
directors, even if the remaining directors constitute less than
a quorum, or by the sole remaining director. In the alternative,
a board may hold an election to fill the vacancy, in which case
the election procedures must conform to sub-subparagraph 4.a.
unless the association governs 10 units or fewer and has opted
out of the statutory election process, in which case the bylaws
of the association control. Unless otherwise provided in the
bylaws, a board member appointed or elected under this section
shall fill the vacancy for the unexpired term of the seat being
filled. Filling vacancies created by recall is governed by
paragraph (j) and rules adopted by the division.
10. This chapter does not limit the use of general or
limited proxies, require the use of general or limited proxies,
or require the use of a written ballot or voting machine for any
agenda item or election at any meeting of a timeshare
condominium association or nonresidential condominium
association.

Notwithstanding subparagraph (b)2. and sub-subparagraph 4.a., an
association of 10 or fewer units may, by affirmative vote of a
majority of the total voting interests, provide for different
voting and election procedures in its bylaws, which may be by a
proxy specifically delineating the different voting and election
procedures. The different voting and election procedures may
provide for elections to be conducted by limited or general
proxy.
Section 3. This act shall take effect July 1, 2018.