A bill to be entitled                      
An act relating to public records; creating s.
394.464, F.S.; providing an exemption from public
records requirements for petitions for voluntary and
involuntary admission for mental health treatment,
court orders, related records, and personal
identifying information regarding persons seeking
mental health treatment and services; providing
exceptions authorizing the release of such petitions,
orders, records, and identifying information to
certain persons and entities; providing applicability;
prohibiting a clerk of court from publishing personal
identifying information on a court docket or in a
publicly accessible file; providing for retroactive
application; providing for future legislative review
and repeal of the exemption; providing a statement of
public necessity; providing a contingent effective
date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:

Section 1. Section 394.464, Florida Statutes, is created to
read:
394.464 Court records; confidentiality.—
(1) All petitions for voluntary and involuntary admission
for mental health treatment, court orders, and related records
that are filed with or by a court under this part are
confidential and exempt from s. 119.071(1) and s. 24(a), Art. I
of the State Constitution. Pleadings and other documents made
confidential and exempt by this section may be disclosed by the
clerk of the court, upon request, to any of the following:
(a) The petitioner.
(b) The petitioner’s attorney.
(c) The respondent.
(d) The respondent’s attorney.
(e) The respondent’s guardian or guardian advocate, if
applicable.
(f) In the case of a minor respondent, the respondent’s
parent, guardian, legal custodian, or guardian advocate.
(g) The respondent’s treating health care practitioner.
(h) The respondent’s health care surrogate or proxy.
(i) The Department of Children and Families, without
charge.
(j) The Department of Corrections, without charge, if the
respondent is committed or is to be returned to the custody of
the Department of Corrections from the Department of Children
and Families.
(k) A person or entity authorized to view records upon a
court order for good cause. In determining if there is good
cause for the disclosure of records, the court must weigh the
person or entity’s need for the information against potential
harm to the respondent from the disclosure.
(2) This section does not preclude the clerk of the court
from submitting the information required by s. 790.065 to the
Department of Law Enforcement.
(3) The clerk of the court may not publish personal
identifying information on a court docket or in a publicly
accessible file.
(4) A person or entity receiving information pursuant to
this section shall maintain that information as confidential and
exempt from s. 119.07(1) and s. 24(a), Art. I of the State
Constitution.
(5) The exemption under this section applies to all
documents filed with a court before, on, or after July 1, 2018.
(6) This section is subject to the Open Government Sunset
Review Act in accordance with s. 119.15 and shall stand repealed
on October 2, 2023, unless reviewed and saved from repeal
through reenactment by the Legislature.
Section 2. The Legislature finds that it is a public
necessity that petitions for voluntary and involuntary admission
for mental health treatment and related court orders and records
that are filed with or by a court under part I or part III of
chapter 394, Florida Statutes, and the personal identifying
information of a person seeking mental health treatment
published on a court docket and maintained by the clerk of the
court under part I or part III of chapter 394, Florida Statutes,
be made confidential and exempt from disclosure under s.
119.07(1), Florida Statutes, and s. 24(a), Article I of the
State Constitution. The mental health of a person, including a
minor, is a medical condition, which should be protected from
dissemination to the public. A person’s mental health is also an
intensely private matter. The public stigma associated with a
mental health condition may cause persons in need of treatment
to avoid seeking treatment and related services if the record of
such condition is accessible to the public. Without treatment, a
person’s condition may worsen, the person may harm himself or
herself or others, and the person may become a financial burden
on the state. The content of such records or personal
identifying information should not be made public merely because
they are filed with or by a court or placed on a docket. Making
such petitions, orders, records, and identifying information
confidential and exempt from disclosure will protect such
persons from the release of sensitive, personal information
which could damage their and their families’ reputations. The
publication of personal identifying information on a physical or
virtual docket, regardless of whether any other record is
published, defeats the purpose of protections otherwise
provided. Further, the knowledge that such sensitive, personal
information is subject to disclosure could have a chilling
effect on a person’s willingness to seek out and comply with
mental health treatment services.
Section 3. This act shall take effect on the same date that
SB ____ or similar legislation takes effect, if such legislation
is adopted in the same legislative session or an extension
thereof and becomes a law.