A bill to be entitled                      
An act relating to the Teacher Scholarship Program;
creating s. 1009.897, F.S.; establishing the Teacher
Scholarship Program within the Department of
Education; providing a purpose of, and the criteria
for, student eligibility for the program; specifying
duties of each postsecondary institution for the
program; providing for disbursement of the scholarship
awards; providing for stipends; specifying funding and
the department’s authority to prorate awards under a
certain circumstance; providing for rulemaking;
providing an effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:

Section 1. Section 1009.897, Florida Statutes, is created
to read:
1009.897 The Teacher Scholarship Program.—
(1) The Teacher Scholarship Program is established within
the department to encourage students who exhibit academic
excellence to pursue a career in education. The program shall
provide scholarships to eligible students for upper-division
undergraduate and graduate study. The program shall also provide
a one-time stipend to students who complete their program of
study and their first year of employment as a classroom teacher
at a public school in this state.
(2) To be eligible for an undergraduate scholarship under
the program, a student must meet all of the following
requirements:
(a) Be a full-time, upper-division undergraduate student in
a teacher-preparation program approved by the department
pursuant to s. 1004.04.
(b) The general student eligibility requirements for state
financial aid as specified in s. 1009.40, except as otherwise
provided in this section.
(c) The following academic requirements:
1. Earn an SAT score that corresponds to the 80th SAT
percentile rank or a concordant ACT score; and
2. Maintain a minimum cumulative undergraduate grade point
average of 3.25 on a 4.0 scale.
(3) To be eligible for a graduate scholarship under the
program, a student must meet all of the following requirements:
(a) The criteria specified in paragraphs (2)(b) and (c).
(b) Hold a bachelor’s degree from any college or university
accredited by a regional accrediting association as defined by
State Board of Education rule.
(c) Be a full-time graduate student in an eligible
postsecondary graduate teacher education program leading to a
master’s, specialist, or doctoral degree.
(d) Not have previously received a teaching certificate
resulting from an undergraduate degree in education.
(e) Not have received an undergraduate scholarship pursuant
to this section.
(4) Each postsecondary institution shall do all of the
following:
(a) By each September 1, certify to the department the
names of students eligible for the program.
(b) Throughout the academic year, notify the department of
any scholarship recipient whose scholarship should be rescinded
due to disenrollment from the teacher education program.
(5)(a) An eligible undergraduate student may be awarded a
scholarship of up to $5,000 per semester, not to exceed $10,000
per year, for 2 undergraduate years or for a maximum of 3 years
for a program that requires a fifth year of instruction to
obtain an initial teaching certification.
(b) An eligible graduate student may be awarded a
scholarship of up to $5,000 per semester, not to exceed $10,000
per year, for up to 2 years.
(6)(a) A scholarship recipient may receive a one-time
stipend of $10,000 after:
1. Completing the teacher education program required under
this section and earning a bachelor’s or graduate degree, as
applicable;
2. Notifying the department, in a manner prescribed by
department rule, that he or she has been employed by a school
district in this state as a classroom teacher as defined in s.
1012.01(2); and
3. Completing his or her first year of employment as a
classroom teacher at a public school in this state.
(b) No later than each June 1, the department shall
disburse the stipend to each school district for an eligible
candidate whose employment is confirmed as of May 1. A candidate
who is hired after the first quarter of the academic year is
eligible for a prorated stipend as determined by the department.
A candidate may not receive both the stipend and an award under
s. 1012.731.
(7) This section shall be implemented only to the extent
specifically funded and authorized by law. The department may
prorate the scholarships and stipends authorized by this section
if the appropriation is insufficient to fully fund each eligible
student.
(8) The State Board of Education shall adopt rules to
administer the program.
Section 2. This act shall take effect July 1, 2018.