A bill to be entitled
An act relating to emergency power for health care
facilities; amending s. 400.19, F.S.; requiring the
Agency for Health Care Administration to conduct an
annual inspection of each licensed nursing home
facility to ensure that the facility is in possession
of the required emergency power source and fuel;
amending s. 400.23, F.S.; requiring the agency, in
consultation with the Department of Health and the
Department of Elderly Affairs, to adopt and enforce
rules requiring each facility to have an emergency
power source and a supply of fuel which meet certain
criteria; amending s. 429.34, F.S.; requiring the
agency to conduct an annual inspection of each
licensed nursing home facility to ensure that the
facility is in possession of the required emergency
power source and fuel; amending s. 429.41, F.S.;
requiring the Department of Elderly Affairs, in
consultation with the agency, the Department of
Children and Families, and the Department of Health,
to adopt and enforce rules requiring each facility to
have an emergency power source and a supply of fuel
which meet certain criteria; providing an effective
date.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:
Section 1.        Subsection (5) is added to section 400.19,
Florida Statutes, to read:
400.19      Right of entry and inspection.--
(5)      Each May, before the start of hurricane season, the
agency shall conduct an announced inspection of each facility to
ensure that the facility has an operational emergency power
source and fuel as required in s. 400.23(2)(d) and by rule.
Section 2.        Paragraph (d) of subsection (2) of section
400.23, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
400.23      Rules; evaluation and deficiencies; licensure
status.--
(2)      Pursuant to the intention of the Legislature, the
agency, in consultation with the Department of Health and the
Department of Elderly Affairs, shall adopt and enforce rules to
implement this part and part II of chapter 408, which shall
include reasonable and fair criteria in relation to:
(d)      The equipment essential to the health and welfare of
the residents, including an operational emergency power source
and a supply of fuel sufficient to sustain the emergency power
source for at least 4 days during a power outage. The emergency
power source must provide enough energy to:
1.      Consistently maintain an air temperature of less than
82 degrees Fahrenheit in the facility.
2.      Allow for the refrigeration and standard preparation of
food and beverages that are served by the facility to its
residents and for the production and storage of ice.
3.      Allow for the refrigeration of medicines as may be
customary.
Section 3.        Section 429.34, Florida Statutes, is amended to
read:
429.34      Right of entry and inspection.--
(1)      In addition to the requirements of s. 408.811, a duly
designated officer or employee of the department, the Department
of Children and Families, the Medicaid Fraud Control Unit of the
Office of the Attorney General, the state or local fire marshal,
or a representative of the State Long-Term Care Ombudsman
Program or a member of the state or local long-term care
ombudsman council has the right to enter unannounced upon and
into the premises of any facility licensed under this part in
order to determine the state of compliance with this part, part
II of chapter 408, and applicable rules. Data collected by the
State Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program, local long-term care
ombudsman councils, or the state or local advocacy councils may
be used by the agency in investigations involving violations of
regulatory standards. A person specified in this section who
knows or has reasonable cause to suspect that a vulnerable adult
has been or is being abused, neglected, or exploited shall
immediately report such knowledge or suspicion to the central
abuse hotline pursuant to chapter 415.
(2)     The agency shall inspect each licensed assisted living
facility at least once every 24 months to determine compliance
with this chapter and related rules. If an assisted living
facility is cited for a class I violation or three or more class
II violations arising from separate surveys within a 60-day
period or due to unrelated circumstances during the same survey,
the agency must conduct an additional licensure inspection
within 6 months.
(3)     Each May, before the start of hurricane season, the
agency shall conduct an announced inspection of each licensed
assisted living facility to ensure that the facility has an
operational emergency power source and fuel as required in s.
429.41(1)(a)4. and by rule.
Section 4.        Paragraph (a) of subsection (1) of section
429.41, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
429.41      Rules establishing standards.--
(1)     It is the intent of the Legislature that rules
published and enforced pursuant to this section shall include
criteria by which a reasonable and consistent quality of
resident care and quality of life may be ensured and the results
of such resident care may be demonstrated. Such rules shall also
ensure a safe and sanitary environment that is residential and
noninstitutional in design or nature. It is further intended
that reasonable efforts be made to accommodate the needs and
preferences of residents to enhance the quality of life in a
facility. Uniform firesafety standards for assisted living
facilities shall be established by the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to s. 633.206. The agency, in consultation with the
department, may adopt rules to administer the requirements of
part II of chapter 408. In order to provide safe and sanitary
facilities and the highest quality of resident care
accommodating the needs and preferences of residents, the
department, in consultation with the agency, the Department of
Children and Families, and the Department of Health, shall adopt
rules, policies, and procedures to administer this part, which
must include reasonable and fair minimum standards in relation
to:
(a)      The requirements for and maintenance of facilities,
not in conflict with chapter 553, relating to plumbing, heating,
cooling, lighting, ventilation, living space, and other housing
conditions, which will ensure the health, safety, and comfort of
residents suitable to the size of the structure.
1.      Firesafety evacuation capability determination.--An
evacuation capability evaluation for initial licensure shall be
conducted within 6 months after the date of licensure.
2.      Firesafety requirements.--
a.      The National Fire Protection Association, Life Safety
Code, NFPA 101 and 101A, current editions, shall be used in
determining the uniform firesafety code adopted by the State
Fire Marshal for assisted living facilities, pursuant to s.
633.206.
b.      A local government or a utility may charge fees only in
an amount not to exceed the actual expenses incurred by the
local government or the utility relating to the installation and
maintenance of an automatic fire sprinkler system in a licensed
assisted living facility structure.
c.      All licensed facilities must have an annual fire
inspection conducted by the local fire marshal or authority
having jurisdiction.
d.      An assisted living facility that is issued a building
permit or certificate of occupancy before July 1, 2016, may at
its option and after notifying the authority having
jurisdiction, remain under the provisions of the 1994 and 1995
editions of the National Fire Protection Association, Life
Safety Code, NFPA 101, and NFPA 101A. The facility opting to
remain under such provisions may make repairs, modernizations,
renovations, or additions to, or rehabilitate, the facility in
compliance with NFPA 101, 1994 edition, and may utilize the
alternative approaches to life safety in compliance with NFPA
101A, 1995 edition. However, a facility for which a building
permit or certificate of occupancy is issued before July 1,
2016, that undergoes Level III building alteration or
rehabilitation, as defined in the Florida Building Code, or
seeks to utilize features not authorized under the 1994 or 1995
editions of the Life Safety Code must thereafter comply with all
aspects of the uniform firesafety standards established under s.
633.206, and the Florida Fire Prevention Code, in effect for
assisted living facilities as adopted by the State Fire Marshal.
3.      Resident elopement requirements.--Facilities are
required to conduct a minimum of two resident elopement
prevention and response drills per year. All administrators and
direct care staff must participate in the drills which shall
include a review of procedures to address resident elopement.
Facilities must document the implementation of the drills and
ensure that the drills are conducted in a manner consistent with
the facility's resident elopement policies and procedures.
4.      Emergency power sources for use during power outages.--
Facilities are required to possess an operational emergency
power source and a supply of fuel sufficient to sustain the
emergency power source for at least 4 days during a power
outage. The emergency power source must provide enough energy
to:
a.      Consistently maintain an air temperature of less than
82 degrees Fahrenheit in the facility.
b.      Allow for the refrigeration and standard preparation of
food and beverages that are served by the facility to its
residents and for the production and storage of ice.
c.      Allow for the refrigeration of medicines as may be
customary.
Section 5.        This act shall take effect July 1, 2018.