A bill to be entitled
An act relating to state employees' prescription drug
program; amending s. 110.12315, F.S.; requiring the
Department of Management Services to implement
formulary management cost-saving measures; providing
requirements for such measures; amending ch. 99-255,
Laws of Florida; removing a provision that prohibits
the department from implementing a restricted
prescription drug formulary or prior authorization
program in the state employees' prescription drug
program; providing an effective date.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:
Section 1.        Subsection (9) is added to section 110.12315,
Florida Statutes, to read:
110.12315        Prescription drug program.--The state employees'
prescription drug program is established. This program shall be
administered by the Department of Management Services, according
to the terms and conditions of the plan as established by the
relevant provisions of the annual General Appropriations Act and
implementing legislation, subject to the following conditions:
(9)     The department shall implement formulary management
cost-saving measures. Such measures must require prescription
drugs to be subject to formulary inclusion or exclusion and may
not restrict access to the most clinically appropriate,
clinically effective, and lowest net-cost prescription drugs.
However, excluded drugs may be available for inclusion if a
physician, advanced registered nurse practitioner, or physician
assistant prescribing a pharmaceutical clearly states on the
prescription that the excluded drug is medically necessary.
Section 2.        Section 8 of Chapter 99-255, Laws of Florida,
is amended to read:
Section 8.        The Department of Management Services shall not
implement a prior authorization program or a restricted
formulary program that restricts a non-HMO enrollee's access to
prescription drugs beyond the provisions of paragraph (b)
related specifically to generic equivalents for prescriptions
and the provisions in paragraph (d) related specifically to
starter dose programs or the dispensing of long-term maintenance
medications. The prior authorization program expanded pursuant
to section 8 of the 1998-1999 General Appropriations Act is
hereby terminated. If this section conflicts with any General
Appropriations Act or any act implementing a General
Appropriations Act, the Legislature intends that the provisions
of this section shall prevail. This section shall take effect
upon becoming law.
Section 3.        This act shall take effect July 1, 2018.