A bill to be entitled
An act relating to community associations; amending s.
718.111, F.S.; revising condominium association
recordkeeping and financial reporting requirements;
revising record retention policies; revising the list
of documents that the association is required to post
online; limiting an association's liability for
inadvertent disclosure of protected or restricted
information; amending s. 718.112, F.S.; revising
provisions relating to required association bylaws;
removing board term limits; authorizing an association
to adopt rules for posting certain notices on a
website; providing responsibilities for unit owners
who receive electronic notices; revising and providing
board member recall and challenge requirements;
authorizing the recovery of attorney fees and costs in
an action to challenge the validity of a board member
recall; amending s. 718.113, F.S.; revising voting
requirements relating to alterations and additions to
certain common elements or association property;
amending s. 718.3026, F.S.; removing a provision
relating to certain contracts or transactions
regarding conflicts of interest; amending s. 718.3027,
F.S.; providing requirements for proposed activity
that is identified as a conflict of interest; amending
s. 718.303, F.S.; revising fine and suspension
requirements; amending s. 718.707, F.S.; revising the
time period for classification as a bulk assignee or
bulk buyer; amending s. 719.104, F.S.; revising
cooperative association recordkeeping requirements;
amending s. 719.106, F.S.; revising requirements to
serve as a board member; prohibiting a board member
from voting via e-mail; authorizing an association to
adopt rules for posting certain notices on a website;
providing responsibilities for unit owners who receive
electronic notices; providing that directors or
officers who are delinquent in certain payments owed
in excess of certain periods of time be deemed to have
abandoned their offices; amending s. 719.107, F.S.;
specifying that certain services which are obtained
pursuant to a bulk contract are deemed a common
expense; amending s. 719.303, F.S.; revising fine and
suspension requirements; amending s. 720.303, F.S.;
prohibiting a board member from voting via e-mail;
amending s. 720.305, F.S.; revising fine and
suspension requirements; amending s. 720.306, F.S.;
revising election requirements; amending s. 720.3085,
F.S.; providing applicability; providing an effective
date.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:
Section 1.         Subsection (3), paragraphs (a), (b), and (g) of
subsection (12), and paragraph (e) of subsection (13) of section
718.111, Florida Statutes, are amended to read:
718.111       The association.--
(3)     POWER TO MANAGE CONDOMINIUM PROPERTY AND TO CONTRACT,
SUE, AND BE SUED; CONFLICT OF INTEREST.--
(a)     The association may contract, sue, or be sued with
respect to the exercise or nonexercise of its powers. For these
purposes, the powers of the association include, but are not
limited to, the maintenance, management, and operation of the
condominium property. After control of the association is
obtained by unit owners other than the developer, the
association may institute, maintain, settle, or appeal actions
or hearings in its name on behalf of all unit owners concerning
matters of common interest to most or all unit owners,
including, but not limited to, the common elements; the roof and
structural components of a building or other improvements;
mechanical, electrical, and plumbing elements serving an
improvement or a building; representations of the developer
pertaining to any existing or proposed commonly used facilities;
and protesting ad valorem taxes on commonly used facilities and
on units; and may defend actions in eminent domain or bring
inverse condemnation actions. If the association has the
authority to maintain a class action, the association may be
joined in an action as representative of that class with
reference to litigation and disputes involving the matters for
which the association could bring a class action. Nothing herein
limits any statutory or common-law right of any individual unit
owner or class of unit owners to bring any action without
participation by the association which may otherwise be
available.
(b)      An association may not hire an attorney who represents
the management company of the association.
(12)        OFFICIAL RECORDS.--
(a)      From the inception of the association, the association
shall maintain each of the following items, if applicable, which
constitutes the official records of the association:
1.      A copy of the plans, permits, warranties, and other
items provided by the developer pursuant to s. 718.301(4).
2.      A photocopy of the recorded declaration of condominium
of each condominium operated by the association and each
amendment to each declaration.
3.      A photocopy of the recorded bylaws of the association
and each amendment to the bylaws.
4.      A certified copy of the articles of incorporation of
the association, or other documents creating the association,
and each amendment thereto.
5.      A copy of the current rules of the association.
6.      A book or books that contain the minutes of all
meetings of the association, the board of administration, and
the unit owners, which minutes must be retained for at least 7
years.
7.      A current roster of all unit owners and their mailing
addresses, unit identifications, voting certifications, and, if
known, telephone numbers. The association shall also maintain
the e-mail electronic mailing addresses and facsimile numbers of
unit owners consenting to receive notice by electronic
transmission. The e-mail electronic mailing addresses and
facsimile numbers are not accessible to unit owners if consent
to receive notice by electronic transmission is not provided in
accordance with sub-subparagraph (c)3.e. However, the
association is not liable for an inadvertent disclosure of the
e-mail electronic mail address or facsimile number for receiving
electronic transmission of notices.
8.      All current insurance policies of the association and
condominiums operated by the association.
9.      A current copy of any management agreement, lease, or
other contract to which the association is a party or under
which the association or the unit owners have an obligation or
responsibility.
10.      Bills of sale or transfer for all property owned by
the association.
11.      Accounting records for the association and separate
accounting records for each condominium that the association
operates. All accounting records must be maintained for at least
7 years. Any person who knowingly or intentionally defaces or
destroys such records, or who knowingly or intentionally fails
to create or maintain such records, with the intent of causing
harm to the association or one or more of its members, is
personally subject to a civil penalty pursuant to s.
718.501(1)(d). The accounting records must include, but are not
limited to:
a.      Accurate, itemized, and detailed records of all
receipts and expenditures.
b.      A current account and a monthly, bimonthly, or
quarterly statement of the account for each unit designating the
name of the unit owner, the due date and amount of each
assessment, the amount paid on the account, and the balance due.
c.      All audits, reviews, accounting statements, and
financial reports of the association or condominium.
d.      All contracts for work to be performed. Bids for work
to be performed are also considered official records and must be
maintained by the association.
12.      Ballots, sign-in sheets, voting proxies, and all other
papers and electronic records relating to voting by unit owners,
which must be maintained for 1 year from the date of the
election, vote, or meeting to which the document relates,
notwithstanding paragraph (b).
13.     All rental records if the association is acting as
agent for the rental of condominium units.
14.     A copy of the current question and answer sheet as
described in s. 718.504.
15.     All other written records of the association not
specifically included in the foregoing which are related to the
operation of the association.
16.     A copy of the inspection report as described in s.
718.301(4)(p).
17.     Bids for materials, equipment, or services.
(b)     The official records specified in subparagraphs (a)1.-
6. must be permanently maintained from the inception of the
association. All other official records of the association must
be maintained within the state for at least 7 years, unless
otherwise provided by general law. The records of the
association shall be made available to a unit owner within 45
miles of the condominium property or within the county in which
the condominium property is located within 10 5 working days
after receipt of a written request by the board or its designee.
However, such distance requirement does not apply to an
association governing a timeshare condominium. This paragraph
may be complied with by having a copy of the official records of
the association available for inspection or copying on the
condominium property or association property, or the association
may offer the option of making the records available to a unit
owner electronically via the Internet or by allowing the records
to be viewed in electronic format on a computer screen and
printed upon request. The association is not responsible for the
use or misuse of the information provided to an association
member or his or her authorized representative pursuant to the
compliance requirements of this chapter unless the association
has an affirmative duty not to disclose such information
pursuant to this chapter.
(g)1.       By January July 1, 2019 2018, an association
managing a condominium with 150 or more units which does not
contain manage timeshare units shall post digital copies of the
documents specified in subparagraph 2. on its website.
a.      The association's website must be:
(I)      An independent website or web portal wholly owned and
operated by the association; or
(II)        A website or web portal operated by a third-party
provider with whom the association owns, leases, rents, or
otherwise obtains the right to operate a web page, subpage, web
portal, or collection of subpages or web portals dedicated to
the association's activities and on which required notices,
records, and documents may be posted by the association.
b.      The association's website must be accessible through
the Internet and must contain a subpage, web portal, or other
protected electronic location that is inaccessible to the
general public and accessible only to unit owners and employees
of the association.
c.      Upon a unit owner's written request, the association
must provide the unit owner with a username and password and
access to the protected sections of the association's website
that contain any notices, records, or documents that must be
electronically provided.
2.      A current copy of the following documents must be
posted in digital format on the association's website:
a.      The recorded declaration of condominium of each
condominium operated by the association and each amendment to
each declaration.
b.      The recorded bylaws of the association and each
amendment to the bylaws.
c.      The articles of incorporation of the association, or
other documents creating the association, and each amendment
thereto. The copy posted pursuant to this sub-subparagraph must
be a copy of the articles of incorporation filed with the
Department of State.
d.      The rules of the association.
e.      Any management agreement, lease, or other contract to
which the association is a party or under which the association
or the unit owners have an obligation or responsibility and,
after bidding for the related materials, equipment, or services
has closed, a list of bids received by the association within
the past year. Summaries of bids for materials, equipment, or
services must be maintained on the website for 1 year. In lieu
of summaries, complete copies of the bids may be posted.
f.      The annual budget required by s. 718.112(2)(f) and any
proposed budget to be considered at the annual meeting.
g.      The financial report required by subsection (13) and
any proposed financial report to be considered at a meeting.
h.      The certification of each director required by s.
718.112(2)(d)4.b.
i.      All contracts or transactions between the association
and any director, officer, corporation, firm, or association
that is not an affiliated condominium association or any other
entity in which an association director is also a director or
officer and financially interested.
j.      Any contract or document regarding a conflict of
interest or possible conflict of interest as provided in ss.
468.436(2)(b)6. and 718.3027(3) ss. 468.436(2) and 718.3026(3).
k.      The notice of any unit owner meeting and the agenda for
the meeting, as required by s. 718.112(2)(d)3., no later than 14
days before the meeting. The notice must be posted in plain view
on the front page of the website, or on a separate subpage of
the website labeled "Notices" which is conspicuously visible and
linked from the front page. The association must also post on
its website any document to be considered and voted on by the
owners during the meeting or any document listed on the agenda
at least 7 days before the meeting at which the document or the
information within the document will be considered.
l.      Notice of any board meeting, the agenda, and any other
document required for the meeting as required by s.
718.112(2)(c), which must be posted no later than the date
required for notice pursuant to s. 718.112(2)(c).
3.      The association shall ensure that the information and
records described in paragraph (c), which are not allowed
permitted to be accessible to unit owners, are not posted on the
association's website. If protected information or information
restricted from being accessible to unit owners is included in
documents that are required to be posted on the association's
website, the association shall ensure the information is
redacted before posting the documents online. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the association or its agent is not liable for
disclosing information that is protected or restricted pursuant
to this paragraph unless such disclosure was made with a knowing
or intentional disregard of the protected or restricted nature
of such information.
(13)        FINANCIAL REPORTING.--Within 90 days after the end of
the fiscal year, or annually on a date provided in the bylaws,
the association shall prepare and complete, or contract for the
preparation and completion of, a financial report for the
preceding fiscal year. Within 21 days after the final financial
report is completed by the association or received from the
third party, but not later than 120 days after the end of the
fiscal year or other date as provided in the bylaws, the
association shall mail to each unit owner at the address last
furnished to the association by the unit owner, or hand deliver
to each unit owner, a copy of the most recent financial report
or a notice that a copy of the most recent financial report will
be mailed or hand delivered to the unit owner, without charge,
within 5 business days after receipt of a written request from
the unit owner. The division shall adopt rules setting forth
uniform accounting principles and standards to be used by all
associations and addressing the financial reporting requirements
for multicondominium associations. The rules must include, but
not be limited to, standards for presenting a summary of
association reserves, including a good faith estimate disclosing
the annual amount of reserve funds that would be necessary for
the association to fully fund reserves for each reserve item
based on the straight-line accounting method. This disclosure is
not applicable to reserves funded via the pooling method. In
adopting such rules, the division shall consider the number of
members and annual revenues of an association. Financial reports
shall be prepared as follows:
(e)     A unit owner may provide written notice to the
division of the association's failure to mail or hand deliver
him or her a copy of the most recent financial report within 5
business days after he or she submitted a written request to the
association for a copy of such report. If the division
determines that the association failed to mail or hand deliver a
copy of the most recent financial report to the unit owner, the
division shall provide written notice to the association that
the association must mail or hand deliver a copy of the most
recent financial report to the unit owner and the division
within 5 business days after it receives such notice from the
division. An association that fails to comply with the
division's request may not waive the financial reporting
requirement provided in paragraph (d) for the fiscal year in
which the unit owner's request was made and the following fiscal
year. A financial report received by the division pursuant to
this paragraph shall be maintained, and the division shall
provide a copy of such report to an association member upon his
or her request.
Section 2.         Paragraphs (a), (c), (d), and (j) of subsection
(2) of section 718.112, Florida Statutes, are amended to read:
718.112       Bylaws.--
(2)      REQUIRED PROVISIONS.--The bylaws shall provide for the
following and, if they do not do so, shall be deemed to include
the following:
(a)      Administration.--
1.      The form of administration of the association shall be
described indicating the title of the officers and board of
administration and specifying the powers, duties, manner of
selection and removal, and compensation, if any, of officers and
boards. In the absence of such a provision, the board of
administration shall be composed of five members, unless the
except in the case of a condominium which has five or fewer
units. The board shall consist of not fewer than three members
in condominiums with five or fewer units that are not-for-profit
corporations, in which case in a not-for-profit corporation the
board shall consist of not fewer than three members. In the
absence of provisions to the contrary in the bylaws, the board
of administration shall have a president, a secretary, and a
treasurer, who shall perform the duties of such officers
customarily performed by officers of corporations. Unless
prohibited in the bylaws, the board of administration may
appoint other officers and grant them the duties it deems
appropriate. Unless otherwise provided in the bylaws, the
officers shall serve without compensation and at the pleasure of
the board of administration. Unless otherwise provided in the
bylaws, the members of the board shall serve without
compensation.
2.      When a unit owner of a residential condominium files a
written inquiry by certified mail with the board of
administration, the board shall respond in writing to the unit
owner within 30 days after receipt of the inquiry. The board's
response shall either give a substantive response to the
inquirer, notify the inquirer that a legal opinion has been
requested, or notify the inquirer that advice has been requested
from the division. If the board requests advice from the
division, the board shall, within 10 days after its receipt of
the advice, provide in writing a substantive response to the
inquirer. If a legal opinion is requested, the board shall,
within 60 days after the receipt of the inquiry, provide in
writing a substantive response to the inquiry. The failure to
provide a substantive response to the inquiry as provided herein
precludes the board from recovering attorney fees and costs in
any subsequent litigation, administrative proceeding, or
arbitration arising out of the inquiry. The association may
through its board of administration adopt reasonable rules and
regulations regarding the frequency and manner of responding to
unit owner inquiries, one of which may be that the association
is only obligated to respond to one written inquiry per unit in
any given 30-day period. In such a case, any additional inquiry
or inquiries must be responded to in the subsequent 30-day
period, or periods, as applicable.
(c)     Board of administration meetings.--Meetings of the
board of administration at which a quorum of the members is
present are open to all unit owners. Members of the board of
administration may use e-mail as a means of communication but
may not cast a vote on an association matter via e-mail. A unit
owner may tape record or videotape the meetings. The right to
attend such meetings includes the right to speak at such
meetings with reference to all designated agenda items. The
division shall adopt reasonable rules governing the tape
recording and videotaping of the meeting. The association may
adopt written reasonable rules governing the frequency,
duration, and manner of unit owner statements.
1.      Adequate notice of all board meetings, which must
specifically identify all agenda items, must be posted
conspicuously on the condominium property at least 48 continuous
hours before the meeting except in an emergency. If 20 percent
of the voting interests petition the board to address an item of
business, the board, within 60 days after receipt of the
petition, shall place the item on the agenda at its next regular
board meeting or at a special meeting called for that purpose.
An item not included on the notice may be taken up on an
emergency basis by a vote of at least a majority plus one of the
board members. Such emergency action must be noticed and
ratified at the next regular board meeting. However, Written
notice of a meeting at which a nonemergency special assessment
or an amendment to rules regarding unit use will be considered
must be mailed, delivered, or electronically transmitted to the
unit owners and posted conspicuously on the condominium property
at least 14 days before the meeting. Evidence of compliance with
this 14-day notice requirement must be made by an affidavit
executed by the person providing the notice and filed with the
official records of the association. Notice of any meeting in
which regular or special assessments against unit owners are to
be considered must specifically state that assessments will be
considered and provide the estimated cost and description of the
purposes for such assessments. Upon notice to the unit owners,
the board shall, by duly adopted rule, designate a specific
location on the condominium or association property where all
notices of board meetings must be posted. If there is no
condominium property or association property where notices can
be posted, notices shall be mailed, delivered, or electronically
transmitted to each unit owner at least 14 days before the
meeting. In lieu of or in addition to the physical posting of
the notice on the condominium property, the association may, by
reasonable rule, adopt a procedure for conspicuously posting and
repeatedly broadcasting the notice and the agenda on a closed-
circuit cable television system serving the condominium
association. However, if broadcast notice is used in lieu of a
notice physically posted on condominium property, the notice and
agenda must be broadcast at least four times every broadcast
hour of each day that a posted notice is otherwise required
under this section. If broadcast notice is provided, the notice
and agenda must be broadcast in a manner and for a sufficient
continuous length of time so as to allow an average reader to
observe the notice and read and comprehend the entire content of
the notice and the agenda. In addition to any of the authorized
means of providing notice of a meeting of the board, the
association may, by rule, adopt a procedure for conspicuously
posting the meeting notice and the agenda on a website serving
the condominium association for at least the minimum period of
time for which a notice of a meeting is also required to be
physically posted on the condominium property. Any rule adopted
shall, in addition to other matters, include a requirement that
the association send an electronic notice in the same manner as
a notice for a meeting of the members, which must include a
hyperlink to the website where the notice is posted, to unit
owners whose e-mail addresses are included in the association's
official records. Notice of any meeting in which regular or
special assessments against unit owners are to be considered
must specifically state that assessments will be considered and
provide the nature, estimated cost, and description of the
purposes for such assessments.
2.      Meetings of a committee to take final action on behalf
of the board or make recommendations to the board regarding the
association budget are subject to this paragraph. Meetings of a
committee that does not take final action on behalf of the board
or make recommendations to the board regarding the association
budget are subject to this section, unless those meetings are
exempted from this section by the bylaws of the association.
3.      Notwithstanding any other law, the requirement that
board meetings and committee meetings be open to the unit owners
does not apply to:
a.      Meetings between the board or a committee and the
association's attorney, with respect to proposed or pending
litigation, if the meeting is held for the purpose of seeking or
rendering legal advice; or
b.      Board meetings held for the purpose of discussing
personnel matters.
(d)     Unit owner meetings.--
1.      An annual meeting of the unit owners must shall be held
at the location provided in the association bylaws and, if the
bylaws are silent as to the location, the meeting must shall be
held within 45 miles of the condominium property. However, such
distance requirement does not apply to an association governing
a timeshare condominium.
2.      Unless the bylaws provide otherwise, a vacancy on the
board caused by the expiration of a director's term must shall
be filled by electing a new board member, and the election must
be by secret ballot. An election is not required if the number
of vacancies equals or exceeds the number of candidates. For
purposes of this paragraph, the term "candidate" means an
eligible person who has timely submitted the written notice, as
described in sub-subparagraph 4.a., of his or her intention to
become a candidate. Except in a timeshare or nonresidential
condominium, or if the staggered term of a board member does not
expire until a later annual meeting, or if all members' terms
would otherwise expire but there are no candidates, the terms of
all board members expire at the annual meeting, and such members
may stand for reelection unless prohibited by the bylaws. Each
term may not exceed 2 years, unless a shorter term is specified
Board members may serve 2-year terms if permitted by the bylaws
or articles of incorporation. A board member may not serve more
than four consecutive 2-year terms, unless approved by an
affirmative vote of two-thirds of the total voting interests of
the association or unless there are not enough eligible
candidates to fill the vacancies on the board at the time of the
vacancy. If the number of board members whose terms expire at
the annual meeting equals or exceeds the number of candidates,
the candidates become members of the board effective upon the
adjournment of the annual meeting. Unless the bylaws provide
otherwise, any remaining vacancies shall be filled by the
affirmative vote of the majority of the directors making up the
newly constituted board even if the directors constitute less
than a quorum or there is only one director. In a residential
condominium association of more than 10 units or in a
residential condominium association that does not include
timeshare units or timeshare interests, coowners of a unit may
not serve as members of the board of directors at the same time
unless they own more than one unit or unless there are not
enough eligible candidates to fill the vacancies on the board at
the time of the vacancy. A unit owner in a residential
condominium desiring to be a candidate for board membership must
comply with sub-subparagraph 4.a. and must be eligible to be a
candidate to serve on the board of directors at the time of the
deadline for submitting a notice of intent to run in order to
have his or her name listed as a proper candidate on the ballot
or to serve on the board. A person who has been suspended or
removed by the division under this chapter, or who is delinquent
in the payment of any monetary obligation due to the
association, is not eligible to be a candidate for board
membership and may not be listed on the ballot. A person who has
been convicted of any felony in this state or in a United States
District or Territorial Court, or who has been convicted of any
offense in another jurisdiction which would be considered a
felony if committed in this state, is not eligible for board
membership unless such felon's civil rights have been restored
for at least 5 years as of the date such person seeks election
to the board. The validity of an action by the board is not
affected if it is later determined that a board member is
ineligible for board membership due to having been convicted of
a felony. This subparagraph does not limit the term of a member
of the board of a nonresidential or timeshare condominium.
3.      The bylaws must provide the method of calling meetings
of unit owners, including annual meetings. Written notice must
include an agenda, must be mailed, hand delivered, or
electronically transmitted to each unit owner at least 14 days
before the annual meeting, and must be posted in a conspicuous
place on the condominium property at least 14 continuous days
before the annual meeting. Upon notice to the unit owners, the
board shall, by duly adopted rule, designate a specific location
on the condominium property or association property where all
notices of unit owner meetings must shall be posted. This
requirement does not apply if there is no condominium property
or association property for posting notices. In lieu of, or in
addition to, the physical posting of meeting notices, the
association may, by reasonable rule, adopt a procedure for
conspicuously posting and repeatedly broadcasting the notice and
the agenda on a closed-circuit cable television system serving
the condominium association. However, if broadcast notice is
used in lieu of a notice posted physically on the condominium
property, the notice and agenda must be broadcast at least four
times every broadcast hour of each day that a posted notice is
otherwise required under this section. If broadcast notice is
provided, the notice and agenda must be broadcast in a manner
and for a sufficient continuous length of time so as to allow an
average reader to observe the notice and read and comprehend the
entire content of the notice and the agenda. In addition to any
of the authorized means of providing notice of a meeting of the
board, the association may, by rule, adopt a procedure for
conspicuously posting the meeting notice and the agenda on a
website serving the condominium association for at least the
minimum period of time for which a notice of a meeting is also
required to be physically posted on the condominium property.
Any rule adopted shall, in addition to other matters, include a
requirement that the association send an electronic notice in
the same manner as a notice for a meeting of the members, which
must include a hyperlink to the website where the notice is
posted, to unit owners whose e-mail addresses are included in
the association's official records. Unless a unit owner waives
in writing the right to receive notice of the annual meeting,
such notice must be hand delivered, mailed, or electronically
transmitted to each unit owner. Notice for meetings and notice
for all other purposes must be mailed to each unit owner at the
address last furnished to the association by the unit owner, or
hand delivered to each unit owner. However, if a unit is owned
by more than one person, the association must provide notice to
the address that the developer identifies for that purpose and
thereafter as one or more of the owners of the unit advise the
association in writing, or if no address is given or the owners
of the unit do not agree, to the address provided on the deed of
record. An officer of the association, or the manager or other
person providing notice of the association meeting, must provide
an affidavit or United States Postal Service certificate of
mailing, to be included in the official records of the
association affirming that the notice was mailed or hand
delivered in accordance with this provision.
4.      The members of the board of a residential condominium
shall be elected by written ballot or voting machine. Proxies
may not be used in electing the board in general elections or
elections to fill vacancies caused by recall, resignation, or
otherwise, unless otherwise provided in this chapter. This
subparagraph does not apply to an association governing a
timeshare condominium.
a.      At least 60 days before a scheduled election, the
association shall mail, deliver, or electronically transmit, by
separate association mailing or included in another association
mailing, delivery, or transmission, including regularly
published newsletters, to each unit owner entitled to a vote, a
first notice of the date of the election. A unit owner or other
eligible person desiring to be a candidate for the board must
give written notice of his or her intent to be a candidate to
the association at least 40 days before a scheduled election.
Together with the written notice and agenda as set forth in
subparagraph 3., the association shall mail, deliver, or
electronically transmit a second notice of the election to all
unit owners entitled to vote, together with a ballot that lists
all candidates. Upon request of a candidate, an information
sheet, no larger than 8                   1/2 inches by 11 inches, which must be
furnished by the candidate at least 35 days before the election,
must be included with the mailing, delivery, or transmission of
the ballot, with the costs of mailing, delivery, or electronic
transmission and copying to be borne by the association. The
association is not liable for the contents of the information
sheets prepared by the candidates. In order to reduce costs, the
association may print or duplicate the information sheets on
both sides of the paper. The division shall by rule establish
voting procedures consistent with this sub-subparagraph,
including rules establishing procedures for giving notice by
electronic transmission and rules providing for the secrecy of
ballots. Elections shall be decided by a plurality of ballots
cast. There is no quorum requirement; however, at least 20
percent of the eligible voters must cast a ballot in order to
have a valid election. A unit owner may not authorize permit any
other person to vote his or her ballot, and any ballots
improperly cast are invalid. A unit owner who violates this
provision may be fined by the association in accordance with s.
718.303. A unit owner who needs assistance in casting the ballot
for the reasons stated in s. 101.051 may obtain such assistance.
The regular election must occur on the date of the annual
meeting. Notwithstanding this sub-subparagraph, an election is
not required unless more candidates file notices of intent to
run or are nominated than board vacancies exist.
b.      Within 90 days after being elected or appointed to the
board of an association of a residential condominium, each newly
elected or appointed director shall certify in writing to the
secretary of the association that he or she has read the
association's declaration of condominium, articles of
incorporation, bylaws, and current written policies; that he or
she will work to uphold such documents and policies to the best
of his or her ability; and that he or she will faithfully
discharge his or her fiduciary responsibility to the
association's members. In lieu of this written certification,
within 90 days after being elected or appointed to the board,
the newly elected or appointed director may submit a certificate
of having satisfactorily completed the educational curriculum
administered by a division-approved condominium education
provider within 1 year before or 90 days after the date of
election or appointment. The written certification or
educational certificate is valid and does not have to be
resubmitted as long as the director serves on the board without
interruption. A director of an association of a residential
condominium who fails to timely file the written certification
or educational certificate is suspended from service on the
board until he or she complies with this sub-subparagraph. The
board may temporarily fill the vacancy during the period of
suspension. The secretary shall cause the association to retain
a director's written certification or educational certificate
for inspection by the members for 5 years after a director's
election or the duration of the director's uninterrupted tenure,
whichever is longer. Failure to have such written certification
or educational certificate on file does not affect the validity
of any board action.
c.      Any challenge to the election process must be commenced
within 60 days after the election results are announced.
5.      Any approval by unit owners called for by this chapter
or the applicable declaration or bylaws, including, but not
limited to, the approval requirement in s. 718.111(8), must be
made at a duly noticed meeting of unit owners and is subject to
all requirements of this chapter or the applicable condominium
documents relating to unit owner decisionmaking, except that
unit owners may take action by written agreement, without
meetings, on matters for which action by written agreement
without meetings is expressly allowed by the applicable bylaws
or declaration or any law that provides for such action.
6.      Unit owners may waive notice of specific meetings if
allowed by the applicable bylaws or declaration or any law.
Notice of meetings of the board of administration, unit owner
meetings, except unit owner meetings called to recall board
members under paragraph (j), and committee meetings may be given
by electronic transmission to unit owners who consent to receive
notice by electronic transmission. A unit owner who consents to
receiving notices by electronic transmission is solely
responsible for removing or bypassing filters that block receipt
of mass emails sent to members on behalf of the association in
the course of giving electronic notices.
7.      Unit owners have the right to participate in meetings
of unit owners with reference to all designated agenda items.
However, the association may adopt reasonable rules governing
the frequency, duration, and manner of unit owner participation.
8.      A unit owner may tape record or videotape a meeting of
the unit owners subject to reasonable rules adopted by the
division.
9.      Unless otherwise provided in the bylaws, any vacancy
occurring on the board before the expiration of a term may be
filled by the affirmative vote of the majority of the remaining
directors, even if the remaining directors constitute less than
a quorum, or by the sole remaining director. In the alternative,
a board may hold an election to fill the vacancy, in which case
the election procedures must conform to sub-subparagraph 4.a.
unless the association governs 10 units or fewer and has opted
out of the statutory election process, in which case the bylaws
of the association control. Unless otherwise provided in the
bylaws, a board member appointed or elected under this section
shall fill the vacancy for the unexpired term of the seat being
filled. Filling vacancies created by recall is governed by
paragraph (j) and rules adopted by the division.
10.      This chapter does not limit the use of general or
limited proxies, require the use of general or limited proxies,
or require the use of a written ballot or voting machine for any
agenda item or election at any meeting of a timeshare
condominium association or nonresidential condominium
association.
Notwithstanding subparagraph (b)2. and sub-subparagraph 4.a., an
association of 10 or fewer units may, by affirmative vote of a
majority of the total voting interests, provide for different
voting and election procedures in its bylaws, which may be by a
proxy specifically delineating the different voting and election
procedures. The different voting and election procedures may
provide for elections to be conducted by limited or general
proxy.
(j)      Recall of board members.--Subject to s. 718.301, any
member of the board of administration may be recalled and
removed from office with or without cause by the vote or
agreement in writing by a majority of all the voting interests.
A special meeting of the unit owners to recall a member or
members of the board of administration may be called by 10
percent of the voting interests giving notice of the meeting as
required for a meeting of unit owners, and the notice shall
state the purpose of the meeting. Electronic transmission may
not be used as a method of giving notice of a meeting called in
whole or in part for this purpose.
1.      If the recall is approved by a majority of all voting
interests by a vote at a meeting, the recall will be effective
as provided in this paragraph. The board shall duly notice and
hold a board meeting within 5 full business days after the
adjournment of the unit owner meeting to recall one or more
board members. Such member or members shall be recalled
effective immediately upon conclusion of the board meeting
provided that the recall is facially valid. A recalled member
must and shall turn over to the board, within 10 full business
days after the vote, any and all records and property of the
association in their possession.
2.      If the proposed recall is by an agreement in writing by
a majority of all voting interests, the agreement in writing or
a copy thereof shall be served on the association by certified
mail or by personal service in the manner authorized by chapter
48 and the Florida Rules of Civil Procedure. The board of
administration shall duly notice and hold a meeting of the board
within 5 full business days after receipt of the agreement in
writing. Such member or members shall be recalled effective
immediately upon the conclusion of the board meeting provided
that the recall is facially valid. A recalled member must and
shall turn over to the board, within 10 full business days, any
and all records and property of the association in their
possession.
3.      If the board fails to duly notice and hold a board
meeting within 5 full business days after service of an
agreement in writing or within 5 full business days after the
adjournment of the unit owner recall meeting, the recall shall
be deemed effective and the board members so recalled shall turn
over to the board within 10 full business days after the vote
any and all records and property of the association.
4.      If the board fails to duly notice and hold the required
meeting or fails to file the required petition, the unit owner
representative may file a petition pursuant to s. 718.1255
challenging the board's failure to act. The petition must be
filed within 60 days after the expiration of the applicable 5-
full-business-day period. The review of a petition under this
subparagraph is limited to the sufficiency of service on the
board and the facial validity of the written agreement or
ballots filed.
5.      If a vacancy occurs on the board as a result of a
recall or removal and less than a majority of the board members
are removed, the vacancy may be filled by the affirmative vote
of a majority of the remaining directors, notwithstanding any
provision to the contrary contained in this subsection. If
vacancies occur on the board as a result of a recall and a
majority or more of the board members are removed, the vacancies
shall be filled in accordance with procedural rules to be
adopted by the division, which rules need not be consistent with
this subsection. The rules must provide procedures governing the
conduct of the recall election as well as the operation of the
association during the period after a recall but before the
recall election.
6.      A board member who has been recalled may file a
petition pursuant to s. 718.1255 challenging the validity of the
recall. The petition must be filed within 60 days after the
recall. The association and the unit owner representative shall
be named as the respondents. The petition may challenge the
facial validity of the written agreement or ballots filed or the
substantial compliance with the procedural requirements for the
recall. If the arbitrator determines the recall was invalid, the
petitioning board member shall immediately be reinstated and the
recall is null and void. A board member who is successful in
challenging a recall is entitled to recover reasonable attorney
fees and costs from the respondents. The arbitrator may award
reasonable attorney fees and costs to the respondents if they
prevail, if the arbitrator makes a finding that the petitioner's
claim is frivolous.
7.      The division may not accept for filing a recall
petition, whether filed pursuant to subparagraph 1.,
subparagraph 2., subparagraph 4., or subparagraph 6. when there
are 60 or fewer days until the scheduled reelection of the board
member sought to be recalled or when 60 or fewer days have
elapsed since the election of the board member sought to be
recalled.
Section 3.         Subsection (2) of section 718.113, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
718.113       Maintenance; limitation upon improvement; display
of flag; hurricane shutters and protection; display of religious
decorations.--
(2)(a)       Except as otherwise provided in this section, there
shall be no material alteration or substantial additions to the
common elements or to real property which is association
property, except in a manner provided in the declaration as
originally recorded or as amended under the procedures provided
therein. If the declaration as originally recorded or as amended
under the procedures provided therein does not specify the
procedure for approval of material alterations or substantial
additions, 75 percent of the total voting interests of the
association must approve the alterations or additions before the
material alterations or substantial additions are commenced.
This paragraph is intended to clarify existing law and applies
to associations existing on July 1, 2018 October 1, 2008.
(b)     There shall not be any material alteration of, or
substantial addition to, the common elements of any condominium
operated by a multicondominium association unless approved in
the manner provided in the declaration of the affected
condominium or condominiums as originally recorded or as amended
under the procedures provided therein. If a declaration as
originally recorded or as amended under the procedures provided
therein does not specify a procedure for approving such an
alteration or addition, the approval of 75 percent of the total
voting interests of each affected condominium is required before
the material alterations or substantial additions are commenced.
This subsection does not prohibit a provision in any
declaration, articles of incorporation, or bylaws as originally
recorded or as amended under the procedures provided therein
requiring the approval of unit owners in any condominium
operated by the same association or requiring board approval
before a material alteration or substantial addition to the
common elements is permitted. This paragraph is intended to
clarify existing law and applies to associations existing on
July 1, 2018 the effective date of this act.
(c)     There shall not be any material alteration or
substantial addition made to association real property operated
by a multicondominium association, except as provided in the
declaration, articles of incorporation, or bylaws as originally
recorded or as amended under the procedures provided therein. If
the declaration, articles of incorporation, or bylaws as
originally recorded or as amended under the procedures provided
therein do not specify the procedure for approving an alteration
or addition to association real property, the approval of 75
percent of the total voting interests of the association is
required before the material alterations or substantial
additions are commenced. This paragraph is intended to clarify
existing law and applies to associations existing on July 1,
2018 the effective date of this act.
Section 4.          Subsection (3) of section 718.3026, Florida
Statutes, is amended to read:
718.3026          Contracts for products and services; in writing;
bids; exceptions.--Associations with 10 or fewer units may opt
out of the provisions of this section if two-thirds of the unit
owners vote to do so, which opt-out may be accomplished by a
proxy specifically setting forth the exception from this
section.
(3)     As to any contract or other transaction between an
association and one or more of its directors or any other
corporation, firm, association, or entity in which one or more
of its directors are directors or officers or are financially
interested:
(a)     The association shall comply with the requirements of
s. 617.0832.
(b)     The disclosures required by s. 617.0832 shall be
entered into the written minutes of the meeting.
(c)     Approval of the contract or other transaction shall
require an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the directors
present.
(d)     At the next regular or special meeting of the members,
the existence of the contract or other transaction shall be
disclosed to the members. Upon motion of any member, the
contract or transaction shall be brought up for a vote and may
be canceled by a majority vote of the members present. Should
the members cancel the contract, the association shall only be
liable for the reasonable value of goods and services provided
up to the time of cancellation and shall not be liable for any
termination fee, liquidated damages, or other form of penalty
for such cancellation.
Section 5.          Section 718.3027, Florida Statutes, is amended
to read:
718.3027          Conflicts of interest.--
(1)     Directors and officers of a board of an association
that is not a timeshare condominium association, and the
relatives of such directors and officers, must disclose to the
board any activity that may reasonably be construed to be a
conflict of interest. A rebuttable presumption of a conflict of
interest exists if any of the following occurs without prior
notice, as required in subsection (5)(4):
(a)         A director or an officer, or a relative of a director
or an officer, enters into a contract for goods or services with
the association.
(b)         A director or an officer, or a relative of a director
or an officer, holds an interest in a corporation, limited
liability corporation, partnership, limited liability
partnership, or other business entity that conducts business
with the association or proposes to enter into a contract or
other transaction with the association.
(2)     If a director or an officer, or a relative of a
director or an officer, proposes to engage in an activity that
is a conflict of interest, as described in subsection (1), the
proposed activity must be listed on, and all contracts and
transactional documents related to the proposed activity must be
attached to, the meeting agenda. The association shall comply
with the requirements of s. 617.0832, and the disclosures
required by s. 617.0832 shall be entered into the written
minutes of the meeting. Approval of the contract or other
transaction requires an affirmative vote of two-thirds of all
other directors present. At the next regular or special meeting
of the members, the existence of the contract or other
transaction shall be disclosed to the members. Upon motion of
any member, the contract or transaction shall be brought up for
a vote and may be canceled by a majority vote of the members
present. If the contract is canceled, the association is only
liable for the reasonable value of the goods and services
provided up to the time of cancellation and is not liable for
any termination fee, liquidated damages, or other form of
penalty for such cancellation.
(3)     If the board votes against the proposed activity, the
director or officer, or the relative of the director or officer,
must notify the board in writing of his or her intention not to
pursue the proposed activity or to withdraw from office. If the
board finds that an officer or a director has violated this
subsection, the officer or director shall be deemed removed from
office. The vacancy shall be filled according to general law.
(4)(3)       A director or an officer, or a relative of a
director or an officer, who is a party to, or has an interest
in, an activity that is a possible conflict of interest, as
described in subsection (1), may attend the meeting at which the
activity is considered by the board and is authorized to make a
presentation to the board regarding the activity. After the
presentation, the director or officer, or the relative of the
director or officer, must leave the meeting during the
discussion of, and the vote on, the activity. A director or an
officer who is a party to, or has an interest in, the activity
must recuse himself or herself from the vote.
(5)(4)       A contract entered into between a director or an
officer, or a relative of a director or an officer, and the
association, which is not a timeshare condominium association,
that has not been properly disclosed as a conflict of interest
or potential conflict of interest as required by s.
718.111(12)(g) is voidable and terminates upon the filing of a
written notice terminating the contract with the board of
directors which contains the consent of at least 20 percent of
the voting interests of the association.
(6)(5)       As used in this section, the term "relative" means
a relative within the third degree of consanguinity by blood or
marriage.
Section 6.         Paragraph (b) of subsection (3) of section
718.303, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
718.303       Obligations of owners and occupants; remedies.--
(3)     The association may levy reasonable fines for the
failure of the owner of the unit or its occupant, licensee, or
invitee to comply with any provision of the declaration, the
association bylaws, or reasonable rules of the association. A
fine may not become a lien against a unit. A fine may be levied
by the board on the basis of each day of a continuing violation,
with a single notice and opportunity for hearing before a
committee as provided in paragraph (b). However, the fine may
not exceed $100 per violation, or $1,000 in the aggregate.
(b)     A fine or suspension levied by the board of
administration may not be imposed unless the board first
provides at least 14 days' written notice and an opportunity for
a hearing to the unit owner and, if applicable, any its
occupant, licensee, or invitee of the unit owner sought to be
fined or suspended and an opportunity for a hearing. The hearing
must be held before a committee of at least three members
appointed by the board who are not officers, directors, or
employees of the association, or the spouse, parent, child,
brother, or sister of an officer, director, or employee other
unit owners who are neither board members nor persons residing
in a board member's household. The role of the committee is
limited to determining whether to confirm or reject the fine or
suspension levied by the board. If the committee does not
approve agree, the proposed fine or suspension by majority vote,
the fine or suspension may not be imposed. If the proposed fine
or suspension is approved by the committee, the fine payment is
due 5 days after the date of the committee meeting at which the
fine is approved. The association must provide written notice of
such fine or suspension by mail or hand delivery to the unit
owner and, if applicable, to any tenant, licensee, or invitee of
the unit owner.
Section 7.         Section 718.707, Florida Statutes, is amended
to read:
718.707       Time limitation for classification as bulk
assignee or bulk buyer.--A person acquiring condominium parcels
may not be classified as a bulk assignee or bulk buyer unless
the condominium parcels were acquired on or after July 1, 2010,
but before July 1, 2018. The date of such acquisition shall be
determined by the date of recording a deed or other instrument
of conveyance for such parcels in the public records of the
county in which the condominium is located, or by the date of
issuing a certificate of title in a foreclosure proceeding with
respect to such condominium parcels.
Section 8.         Paragraphs (a) and (b) of subsection (2) of
section 719.104, Florida Statutes, are amended to read:
719.104       Cooperatives; access to units; records; financial
reports; assessments; purchase of leases.--
(2)     OFFICIAL RECORDS.--
(a)     From the inception of the association, the association
shall maintain a copy of each of the following, where
applicable, which shall constitute the official records of the
association:
1.      The plans, permits, warranties, and other items
provided by the developer pursuant to s. 719.301(4).
2.      A photocopy of the cooperative documents.
3.      A copy of the current rules of the association.
4.      A book or books containing the minutes of all meetings
of the association, of the board of directors, and of the unit
owners, which minutes shall be retained for a period of not less
than 7 years.
5.      A current roster of all unit owners and their mailing
addresses, unit identifications, voting certifications, and, if
known, telephone numbers. The association shall also maintain
the e-mail electronic mailing addresses and the numbers
designated by unit owners for receiving notice sent by
electronic transmission of those unit owners consenting to
receive notice by electronic transmission. The e-mail electronic
mailing addresses and numbers provided by unit owners to receive
notice by electronic transmission shall be removed from
association records when consent to receive notice by electronic
transmission is revoked. However, the association is not liable
for an erroneous disclosure of the e-mail electronic mail
address or the number for receiving electronic transmission of
notices.
6.      All current insurance policies of the association.
7.      A current copy of any management agreement, lease, or
other contract to which the association is a party or under
which the association or the unit owners have an obligation or
responsibility.
8.      Bills of sale or transfer for all property owned by the
association.
9.      Accounting records for the association and separate
accounting records for each unit it operates, according to good
accounting practices. All accounting records shall be maintained
for a period of not less than 7 years. The accounting records
shall include, but not be limited to:
a.      Accurate, itemized, and detailed records of all
receipts and expenditures.
b.      A current account and a monthly, bimonthly, or
quarterly statement of the account for each unit designating the
name of the unit owner, the due date and amount of each
assessment, the amount paid upon the account, and the balance
due.
c.      All audits, reviews, accounting statements, and
financial reports of the association.
d.      All contracts for work to be performed. Bids for work
to be performed shall also be considered official records and
shall be maintained for a period of 1 year.
10.      Ballots, sign-in sheets, voting proxies, and all other
papers and electronic records relating to voting by unit owners,
which shall be maintained for a period of 1 year after the date
of the election, vote, or meeting to which the document relates.
11.     All rental records where the association is acting as
agent for the rental of units.
12.     A copy of the current question and answer sheet as
described in s. 719.504.
13.     All other written records of the association not
specifically included in the foregoing which are related to the
operation of the association.
(b)     The official records of the association must be
maintained within the state for at least 7 years. The records of
the association shall be made available to a unit owner within
45 miles of the cooperative property or within the county in
which the cooperative property is located within 10 5 working
days after receipt of written request by the board or its
designee. This paragraph may be complied with by having a copy
of the official records of the association available for
inspection or copying on the cooperative property or the
association may offer the option of making the records available
to a unit owner electronically via the Internet or by allowing
the records to be viewed in an electronic format on a computer
screen and printed upon request. The association is not
responsible for the use or misuse of the information provided to
an association member or his or her authorized representative
pursuant to the compliance requirements of this chapter unless
the association has an affirmative duty not to disclose such
information pursuant to this chapter.
Section 9.         Paragraphs (a), (c), and (d) of subsection (1)
of section 719.106, Florida Statutes, are amended, and paragraph
(m) is added to that subsection, to read:
719.106       Bylaws; cooperative ownership.--
(1)      MANDATORY PROVISIONS.--The bylaws or other cooperative
documents shall provide for the following, and if they do not,
they shall be deemed to include the following:
(a)      Administration.--
1.      The form of administration of the association shall be
described, indicating the titles of the officers and board of
administration and specifying the powers, duties, manner of
selection and removal, and compensation, if any, of officers and
board members. In the absence of such a provision, the board of
administration shall be composed of five members, unless the
cooperative except in the case of cooperatives has having five
or fewer units., in which case in not-for-profit corporations,
The board shall consist of not fewer than three members in
cooperatives with five or fewer units that are not-for-profit
corporations. In a residential cooperative association of more
than 10 units, co-owners of a unit may not serve as members of
the board of directors at the same time unless the co-owners own
more than one unit or unless there are not enough eligible
candidates to fill the vacancies on the board at the time of the
vacancy. In the absence of provisions to the contrary, the board
of administration shall have a president, a secretary, and a
treasurer, who shall perform the duties of those offices
customarily performed by officers of corporations. Unless
prohibited in the bylaws, the board of administration may
appoint other officers and grant them those duties it deems
appropriate. Unless otherwise provided in the bylaws, the
officers shall serve without compensation and at the pleasure of
the board. Unless otherwise provided in the bylaws, the members
of the board shall serve without compensation.
2.      A person who has been suspended or removed by the
division under this chapter, or who is delinquent in the payment
of any monetary obligation due to the association, is not
eligible to be a candidate for board membership and may not be
listed on the ballot. A director or officer charged by
information or indictment with a felony theft or embezzlement
offense involving the association's funds or property is
suspended from office. The board shall fill the vacancy
according to general law until the end of the period of the
suspension or the end of the director's term of office,
whichever occurs first. However, if the charges are resolved
without a finding of guilt or without acceptance of a plea of
guilty or nolo contendere, the director or officer shall be
reinstated for any remainder of his or her term of office. A
member who has such criminal charges pending may not be
appointed or elected to a position as a director or officer. A
person who has been convicted of any felony in this state or in
any United States District Court, or who has been convicted of
any offense in another jurisdiction which would be considered a
felony if committed in this state, is not eligible for board
membership unless such felon's civil rights have been restored
for at least 5 years as of the date such person seeks election
to the board. The validity of an action by the board is not
affected if it is later determined that a board member is
ineligible for board membership due to having been convicted of
a felony.
3.      When a unit owner files a written inquiry by certified
mail with the board of administration, the board shall respond
in writing to the unit owner within 30 days of receipt of the
inquiry. The board's response shall either give a substantive
response to the inquirer, notify the inquirer that a legal
opinion has been requested, or notify the inquirer that advice
has been requested from the division. If the board requests
advice from the division, the board shall, within 10 days of its
receipt of the advice, provide in writing a substantive response
to the inquirer. If a legal opinion is requested, the board
shall, within 60 days after the receipt of the inquiry, provide
in writing a substantive response to the inquirer. The failure
to provide a substantive response to the inquirer as provided
herein precludes the board from recovering attorney's fees and
costs in any subsequent litigation, administrative proceeding,
or arbitration arising out of the inquiry. The association may,
through its board of administration, adopt reasonable rules and
regulations regarding the frequency and manner of responding to
the unit owners' inquiries, one of which may be that the
association is obligated to respond to only one written inquiry
per unit in any given 30-day period. In such case, any
additional inquiry or inquiries must be responded to in the
subsequent 30-day period, or periods, as applicable.
(c)     Board of administration meetings.--Members of the board
of administration may use e-mail as a means of communication but
may not cast a vote on an association matter via e-mail.
Meetings of the board of administration at which a quorum of the
members is present shall be open to all unit owners. Any unit
owner may tape record or videotape meetings of the board of
administration. The right to attend such meetings includes the
right to speak at such meetings with reference to all designated
agenda items. The division shall adopt reasonable rules
governing the tape recording and videotaping of the meeting. The
association may adopt reasonable written rules governing the
frequency, duration, and manner of unit owner statements.
Adequate notice of all meetings shall be posted in a conspicuous
place upon the cooperative property at least 48 continuous hours
preceding the meeting, except in an emergency. Any item not
included on the notice may be taken up on an emergency basis by
at least a majority plus one of the members of the board. Such
emergency action shall be noticed and ratified at the next
regular meeting of the board. Notice of any meeting in which
regular or special assessments against unit owners are to be
considered must specifically state that assessments will be
considered and provide the estimated cost and description of the
purpose for such assessments. However, Written notice of any
meeting at which nonemergency special assessments, or at which
amendment to rules regarding unit use, will be considered shall
be mailed, delivered, or electronically transmitted to the unit
owners and posted conspicuously on the cooperative property not
less than 14 days before the meeting. Evidence of compliance
with this 14-day notice shall be made by an affidavit executed
by the person providing the notice and filed among the official
records of the association. Upon notice to the unit owners, the
board shall by duly adopted rule designate a specific location
on the cooperative property upon which all notices of board
meetings shall be posted. In lieu of or in addition to the
physical posting of notice of any meeting of the board of
administration on the cooperative property, the association may,
by reasonable rule, adopt a procedure for conspicuously posting
and repeatedly broadcasting the notice and the agenda on a
closed-circuit cable television system serving the cooperative
association. However, if broadcast notice is used in lieu of a
notice posted physically on the cooperative property, the notice
and agenda must be broadcast at least four times every broadcast
hour of each day that a posted notice is otherwise required
under this section. When broadcast notice is provided, the
notice and agenda must be broadcast in a manner and for a
sufficient continuous length of time so as to allow an average
reader to observe the notice and read and comprehend the entire
content of the notice and the agenda. In addition to any of the
authorized means of providing notice of a meeting of the board,
the association may, by rule, adopt a procedure for
conspicuously posting the meeting notice and the agenda on a
website serving the cooperative association for at least the
minimum period of time for which a notice of a meeting is also
required to be physically posted on the cooperative property.
Any rule adopted shall, in addition to other matters, include a
requirement that the association send an electronic notice in
the same manner as a notice for a meeting of the members, which
must include a hyperlink to the website where the notice is
posted, to unit owners whose e-mail addresses are included in
the association's official records. Notice of any meeting in
which regular assessments against unit owners are to be
considered for any reason shall specifically contain a statement
that assessments will be considered and the nature of any such
assessments. Meetings of a committee to take final action on
behalf of the board or to make recommendations to the board
regarding the association budget are subject to the provisions
of this paragraph. Meetings of a committee that does not take
final action on behalf of the board or make recommendations to
the board regarding the association budget are subject to the
provisions of this section, unless those meetings are exempted
from this section by the bylaws of the association.
Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, the requirement
that board meetings and committee meetings be open to the unit
owners does not apply to board or committee meetings held for
the purpose of discussing personnel matters or meetings between
the board or a committee and the association's attorney, with
respect to proposed or pending litigation, if the meeting is
held for the purpose of seeking or rendering legal advice.
(d)     Shareholder meetings.--There shall be an annual meeting
of the shareholders. All members of the board of administration
shall be elected at the annual meeting unless the bylaws provide
for staggered election terms or for their election at another
meeting. Any unit owner desiring to be a candidate for board
membership must comply with subparagraph 1. The bylaws must
provide the method for calling meetings, including annual
meetings. Written notice, which must incorporate an
identification of agenda items, shall be given to each unit
owner at least 14 days before the annual meeting and posted in a
conspicuous place on the cooperative property at least 14
continuous days preceding the annual meeting. Upon notice to the
unit owners, the board must by duly adopted rule designate a
specific location on the cooperative property upon which all
notice of unit owner meetings are posted. In lieu of or in
addition to the physical posting of the meeting notice, the
association may, by reasonable rule, adopt a procedure for
conspicuously posting and repeatedly broadcasting the notice and
the agenda on a closed-circuit cable television system serving
the cooperative association. However, if broadcast notice is
used in lieu of a posted notice, the notice and agenda must be
broadcast at least four times every broadcast hour of each day
that a posted notice is otherwise required under this section.
If broadcast notice is provided, the notice and agenda must be
broadcast in a manner and for a sufficient continuous length of
time to allow an average reader to observe the notice and read
and comprehend the entire content of the notice and the agenda.
In addition to any of the authorized means of providing notice
of a meeting of the shareholders, the association may, by rule,
adopt a procedure for conspicuously posting the meeting notice
and the agenda on a website serving the cooperative association
for at least the minimum period of time for which a notice of a
meeting is also required to be physically posted on the
cooperative property. Any rule adopted shall, in addition to
other matters, include a requirement that the association send
an electronic notice in the same manner as a notice for a
meeting of the members, which must include a hyperlink to the
website where the notice is posted, to unit owners whose e-mail
addresses are included in the association's official records.
Unless a unit owner waives in writing the right to receive
notice of the annual meeting, the notice of the annual meeting
must be sent by mail, hand delivered, or electronically
transmitted to each unit owner. An officer of the association
must provide an affidavit or United States Postal Service
certificate of mailing, to be included in the official records
of the association, affirming that notices of the association
meeting were mailed, hand delivered, or electronically
transmitted, in accordance with this provision, to each unit
owner at the address last furnished to the association.
1.      The board of administration shall be elected by written
ballot or voting machine. A proxy may not be used in electing
the board of administration in general elections or elections to
fill vacancies caused by recall, resignation, or otherwise
unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
a.      At least 60 days before a scheduled election, the
association shall mail, deliver, or transmit, whether by
separate association mailing, delivery, or electronic
transmission or included in another association mailing,
delivery, or electronic transmission, including regularly
published newsletters, to each unit owner entitled to vote, a
first notice of the date of the election. Any unit owner or
other eligible person desiring to be a candidate for the board
of administration must give written notice to the association at
least 40 days before a scheduled election. Together with the
written notice and agenda as set forth in this section, the
association shall mail, deliver, or electronically transmit a
second notice of election to all unit owners entitled to vote,
together with a ballot that lists all candidates. Upon request
of a candidate, the association shall include an information
sheet, no larger than 8                   1/2 inches by 11 inches, which must be
furnished by the candidate at least 35 days before the election,
to be included with the mailing, delivery, or electronic
transmission of the ballot, with the costs of mailing, delivery,
or transmission and copying to be borne by the association. The
association is not liable for the contents of the information
sheets provided by the candidates. In order to reduce costs, the
association may print or duplicate the information sheets on
both sides of the paper. The division shall by rule establish
voting procedures consistent with this subparagraph, including
rules establishing procedures for giving notice by electronic
transmission and rules providing for the secrecy of ballots.
Elections shall be decided by a plurality of those ballots cast.
There is no quorum requirement. However, at least 20 percent of
the eligible voters must cast a ballot in order to have a valid
election. A unit owner may not permit any other person to vote
his or her ballot, and any such ballots improperly cast are
invalid. A unit owner who needs assistance in casting the ballot
for the reasons stated in s. 101.051 may obtain assistance in
casting the ballot. Any unit owner violating this provision may
be fined by the association in accordance with s. 719.303. The
regular election must occur on the date of the annual meeting.
This subparagraph does not apply to timeshare cooperatives.
Notwithstanding this subparagraph, an election and balloting are
not required unless more candidates file a notice of intent to
run or are nominated than vacancies exist on the board. Any
challenge to the election process must be commenced within 60
days after the election results are announced.
b.      Within 90 days after being elected or appointed to the
board, each new director shall certify in writing to the
secretary of the association that he or she has read the
association's bylaws, articles of incorporation, proprietary
lease, and current written policies; that he or she will work to
uphold such documents and policies to the best of his or her
ability; and that he or she will faithfully discharge his or her
fiduciary responsibility to the association's members. Within 90
days after being elected or appointed to the board, in lieu of
this written certification, the newly elected or appointed
director may submit a certificate of having satisfactorily
completed the educational curriculum administered by an
education provider as approved by the division pursuant to the
requirements established in chapter 718 within 1 year before or
90 days after the date of election or appointment. The
educational certificate is valid and does not have to be
resubmitted as long as the director serves on the board without
interruption. A director who fails to timely file the written
certification or educational certificate is suspended from
service on the board until he or she complies with this sub-
subparagraph. The board may temporarily fill the vacancy during
the period of suspension. The secretary of the association shall
cause the association to retain a director's written
certification or educational certificate for inspection by the
members for 5 years after a director's election or the duration
of the director's uninterrupted tenure, whichever is longer.
Failure to have such written certification or educational
certificate on file does not affect the validity of any board
action.
2.      Any approval by unit owners called for by this chapter,
or the applicable cooperative documents, must be made at a duly
noticed meeting of unit owners and is subject to this chapter or
the applicable cooperative documents relating to unit owner
decisionmaking, except that unit owners may take action by
written agreement, without meetings, on matters for which action
by written agreement without meetings is expressly allowed by
the applicable cooperative documents or law which provides for
the unit owner action.
3.      Unit owners may waive notice of specific meetings if
allowed by the applicable cooperative documents or law. Notice
of meetings of the board of administration, shareholder
meetings, except shareholder meetings called to recall board
members under paragraph (f), and committee meetings may be given
by electronic transmission to unit owners who consent to receive
notice by electronic transmission. A unit owner who consents to
receiving notices by electronic transmission is solely
responsible for removing or bypassing filters that may block
receipt of mass emails sent to members on behalf of the
association in the course of giving electronic notices.
4.      Unit owners have the right to participate in meetings
of unit owners with reference to all designated agenda items.
However, the association may adopt reasonable rules governing
the frequency, duration, and manner of unit owner participation.
5.      Any unit owner may tape record or videotape meetings of
the unit owners subject to reasonable rules adopted by the
division.
6.      Unless otherwise provided in the bylaws, a vacancy
occurring on the board before the expiration of a term may be
filled by the affirmative vote of the majority of the remaining
directors, even if the remaining directors constitute less than
a quorum, or by the sole remaining director. In the alternative,
a board may hold an election to fill the vacancy, in which case
the election procedures must conform to the requirements of
subparagraph 1. unless the association has opted out of the
statutory election process, in which case the bylaws of the
association control. Unless otherwise provided in the bylaws, a
board member appointed or elected under this subparagraph shall
fill the vacancy for the unexpired term of the seat being
filled. Filling vacancies created by recall is governed by
paragraph (f) and rules adopted by the division.
Notwithstanding subparagraphs (b)2. and (d)1., an association
may, by the affirmative vote of a majority of the total voting
interests, provide for a different voting and election procedure
in its bylaws, which vote may be by a proxy specifically
delineating the different voting and election procedures. The
different voting and election procedures may provide for
elections to be conducted by limited or general proxy.
(m)     Director or officer delinquencies.--A director or
officer more than 90 days delinquent in the payment of any
monetary obligation due the association shall be deemed to have
abandoned the office, creating a vacancy in the office to be
filled according to law.
Section 10.           Paragraph (b) of subsection (1) of section
719.107, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
719.107       Common expenses; assessment.--
(1)
(b)     If so provided in the bylaws, the cost of
communications services as defined in chapter 202, information
services or Internet services a master antenna television system
or duly franchised cable television service obtained pursuant to
a bulk contract shall be deemed a common expense, and if not
obtained pursuant to a bulk contract, such cost shall be
considered common expense if it is designated as such in a
written contract between the board of administration and the
company providing the communications services as defined in
chapter 202, information services or Internet services master
television antenna system or the cable television service. The
contract shall be for a term of not less than 2 years.
1.      Any contract made by the board after April 2, 1992, for
a community antenna system or duly franchised cable television
service, communications services as defined in chapter 202,
information services or Internet services may be canceled by a
majority of the voting interests present at the next regular or
special meeting of the association. Any member may make a motion
to cancel the contract, but if no motion is made or if such
motion fails to obtain the required majority at the next regular
or special meeting, whichever is sooner, following the making of
the contract, then such contract shall be deemed ratified for
the term therein expressed.
2.      Any such contract shall provide, and shall be deemed to
provide if not expressly set forth, that any hearing impaired or
legally blind unit owner who does not occupy the unit with a
nonhearing impaired or sighted person may discontinue the
service without incurring disconnect fees, penalties, or
subsequent service charges, and as to such units, the owners
shall not be required to pay any common expenses charge related
to such service. If less than all members of an association
share the expenses of cable television, the expense shall be
shared equally by all participating unit owners. The association
may use the provisions of s. 719.108 to enforce payment of the
shares of such costs by the unit owners receiving cable
television.
Section 11.           Paragraph (b) of subsection (3) of section
719.303, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
719.303       Obligations of owners.--
(3)     The association may levy reasonable fines for failure
of the unit owner or the unit's occupant, licensee, or invitee
to comply with any provision of the cooperative documents or
reasonable rules of the association. A fine may not become a
lien against a unit. A fine may be levied by the board on the
basis of each day of a continuing violation, with a single
notice and opportunity for hearing before a committee as
provided in paragraph (b). However, the fine may not exceed $100
per violation, or $1,000 in the aggregate.
(b)     A fine or suspension levied by the board of
administration may not be imposed unless the board first
provides at least 14 days' written notice and an opportunity for
a hearing to the unit owner and, if applicable, any its
occupant, licensee, or invitee of the unit owner sought to be
fined or suspended and an opportunity for a hearing. The hearing
must be held before a committee of at least three members
appointed by the board who are not officers, directors, or
employees of the association, or the spouse, parent, child,
brother, or sister of an officer, director, or employee other
unit owners who are neither board members nor persons residing
in a board member's household. The role of the committee is
limited to determining whether to confirm or reject the fine or
suspension levied by the board. If the committee does not
approve agree with the proposed fine or suspension by majority
vote, the fine or suspension it may not be imposed. If the
proposed fine or suspension is approved by the committee, the
fine payment is due 5 days after the date of the committee
meeting at which the fine is approved. The association must
provide written notice of such fine or suspension by mail or
hand delivery to the unit owner and, if applicable, to any
tenant, licensee, or invitee of the unit owner.
Section 12.           Paragraphs (a) and (c) of subsection (2) of
section 720.303, Florida Statutes, are amended, to read:
720.303       Association powers and duties; meetings of board;
official records; budgets; financial reporting; association
funds; recalls.--
(2)     BOARD MEETINGS.--
(a)     Members of the board of administration may use e-mail
as a means of communication, but may not cast a vote on an
association matter via e-mail. A meeting of the board of
directors of an association occurs whenever a quorum of the
board gathers to conduct association business. Meetings of the
board must be open to all members, except for meetings between
the board and its attorney with respect to proposed or pending
litigation where the contents of the discussion would otherwise
be governed by the attorney-client privilege. A meeting of the
board must be held at a location that is accessible to a
physically handicapped person if requested by a physically
handicapped person who has a right to attend the meeting. The
provisions of this subsection shall also apply to the meetings
of any committee or other similar body when a final decision
will be made regarding the expenditure of association funds and
to meetings of any body vested with the power to approve or
disapprove architectural decisions with respect to a specific
parcel of residential property owned by a member of the
community.
(c)     The bylaws shall provide the following for giving
notice to parcel owners and members of all board meetings and,
if they do not do so, shall be deemed to include provide the
following:
1.      Notices of all board meetings must be posted in a
conspicuous place in the community at least 48 hours in advance
of a meeting, except in an emergency. In the alternative, if
notice is not posted in a conspicuous place in the community,
notice of each board meeting must be mailed or delivered to each
member at least 7 days before the meeting, except in an
emergency. Notwithstanding this general notice requirement, for
communities with more than 100 members, the association bylaws
may provide for a reasonable alternative to posting or mailing
of notice for each board meeting, including publication of
notice, provision of a schedule of board meetings, or the
conspicuous posting and repeated broadcasting of the notice on a
closed-circuit cable television system serving the homeowners'
association. However, if broadcast notice is used in lieu of a
notice posted physically in the community, the notice must be
broadcast at least four times every broadcast hour of each day
that a posted notice is otherwise required. When broadcast
notice is provided, the notice and agenda must be broadcast in a
manner and for a sufficient continuous length of time so as to
allow an average reader to observe the notice and read and
comprehend the entire content of the notice and the agenda. The
association may provide notice by electronic transmission in a
manner authorized by law for meetings of the board of directors,
committee meetings requiring notice under this section, and
annual and special meetings of the members to any member who has
provided a facsimile number or e-mail address to the association
to be used for such purposes; however, a member must consent in
writing to receiving notice by electronic transmission.
2.      An assessment may not be levied at a board meeting
unless the notice of the meeting includes a statement that
assessments will be considered and the nature of the
assessments. Written notice of any meeting at which special
assessments will be considered or at which amendments to rules
regarding parcel use will be considered must be mailed,
delivered, or electronically transmitted to the members and
parcel owners and posted conspicuously on the property or
broadcast on closed-circuit cable television not less than 14
days before the meeting.
3.      Directors may not vote by proxy or by secret ballot at
board meetings, except that secret ballots may be used in the
election of officers. This subsection also applies to the
meetings of any committee or other similar body, when a final
decision will be made regarding the expenditure of association
funds, and to any body vested with the power to approve or
disapprove architectural decisions with respect to a specific
parcel of residential property owned by a member of the
community.
Section 13.           Paragraph (b) of subsection (2) of section
720.305, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
720.305       Obligations of members; remedies at law or in
equity; levy of fines and suspension of use rights.--
(2)      The association may levy reasonable fines. A fine may
not exceed $100 per violation against any member or any member's
tenant, guest, or invitee for the failure of the owner of the
parcel or its occupant, licensee, or invitee to comply with any
provision of the declaration, the association bylaws, or
reasonable rules of the association unless otherwise provided in
the governing documents. A fine may be levied by the board for
each day of a continuing violation, with a single notice and
opportunity for hearing, except that the fine may not exceed
$1,000 in the aggregate unless otherwise provided in the
governing documents. A fine of less than $1,000 may not become a
lien against a parcel. In any action to recover a fine, the
prevailing party is entitled to reasonable attorney fees and
costs from the nonprevailing party as determined by the court.
(b)     A fine or suspension levied may not be imposed by the
board of administration may not be imposed unless the board
first provides without at least 14 days' notice to the parcel
owner and, if applicable, any occupant, licensee, or invitee of
the parcel owner, person sought to be fined or suspended and an
opportunity for a hearing before a committee of at least three
members appointed by the board who are not officers, directors,
or employees of the association, or the spouse, parent, child,
brother, or sister of an officer, director, or employee. If the
committee, by majority vote, does not approve a proposed fine or
suspension, the proposed fine or suspension it may not be
imposed. The role of the committee is limited to determining
whether to confirm or reject the fine or suspension levied by
the board. If the proposed board of administration imposes a
fine or suspension levied by the board is approved by the
committee, the fine payment is due 5 days after the date of the
committee meeting at which the fine is approved. The association
must provide written notice of such fine or suspension by mail
or hand delivery to the parcel owner and, if applicable, to any
tenant, licensee, or invitee of the parcel owner.
Section 14.           Paragraph (a) of subsection (9) of section
720.306, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
720.306       Meetings of members; voting and election
procedures; amendments.--
(9)     ELECTIONS AND BOARD VACANCIES.--
(a)     Elections of directors must be conducted in accordance
with the procedures set forth in the governing documents of the
association. Except as provided in paragraph (b), all members of
the association are eligible to serve on the board of directors,
and a member may nominate himself or herself as a candidate for
the board at a meeting where the election is to be held;
provided, however, that if the election process allows
candidates to be nominated in advance of the meeting, the
association is not required to allow nominations at the meeting.
An election is not required unless more candidates are nominated
than vacancies exist. If an election is not required because
there are either an equal number or fewer qualified candidates
than vacancies exist, and if nominations from the floor are not
required pursuant to this section or the bylaws, write-in
nominations are not permitted and such qualified candidates
shall commence service on the board of directors, regardless of
whether a quorum is attained at the annual meeting. Except as
otherwise provided in the governing documents, boards of
directors must be elected by a plurality of the votes cast by
eligible voters. Any challenge to the election process must be
commenced within 60 days after the election results are
announced.
Section 15.            Paragraph (b) of subsection (3) of section
720.3085, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
720.3085          Payment for assessments; lien claims.--
(3)     Assessments and installments on assessments that are
not paid when due bear interest from the due date until paid at
the rate provided in the declaration of covenants or the bylaws
of the association, which rate may not exceed the rate allowed
by law. If no rate is provided in the declaration or bylaws,
interest accrues at the rate of 18 percent per year.
(b)     Any payment received by an association and accepted
shall be applied first to any interest accrued, then to any
administrative late fee, then to any costs and reasonable
attorney fees incurred in collection, and then to the delinquent
assessment. This paragraph applies notwithstanding any
restrictive endorsement, designation, or instruction placed on
or accompanying a payment. A late fee is not subject to the
provisions of chapter 687 and is not a fine. The foregoing is
applicable notwithstanding s. 673.3111, any purported accord and
satisfaction, or any restrictive endorsement, designation, or
instruction placed on or accompanying a payment. The preceding
sentence is intended to clarify existing law.
Section 16.           This act shall take effect July 1, 2018.