A bill to be entitled                      
An act relating to specialty license plates; amending
ss. 320.08056 and 320.08058, F.S.; directing the
Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles to
develop a Ronald Reagan license plate; establishing an
annual use fee for the plate; providing for
distribution and use of fees collected from the sale
of the plates; providing an effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:

Section 1. Paragraph (ffff) is added to subsection (4) of
section 320.08056, Florida Statutes, to read:
320.08056 Specialty license plates.—
(4) The following license plate annual use fees shall be
collected for the appropriate specialty license plates:
(ffff) Ronald Reagan license plate, $25.
Section 2. Subsection (84) is added to section 320.08058,
Florida Statutes, to read:
320.08058 Specialty license plates.—
(84) RONALD REAGAN LICENSE PLATES.—
(a) The department shall develop a Ronald Reagan license
plate as provided in this section and s. 320.08053. The plate
must bear the colors and design approved by the department. The
word “Florida” must appear at the top of the plate, and the
words “President Ronald Reagan” must appear at the bottom of the
plate.
(b) The department shall remit the proceeds of the annual
use fees from the sale of the plate to the Florida Ronald Reagan
Centennial, Inc. The first $150,000 of the use fee given to the
Florida Ronald Reagan Centennial, Inc., shall be used to pay
startup costs, including costs incurred in the development and
issuance of plates. Thereafter, the proceeds must be used as
follows:
1. Up to 15 percent of the proceeds may be used for
administrative costs of the organization.
2. Up to 10 percent of the proceeds may be used for
promotion and marketing of the plate.
3. Up to 10 percent of the proceeds shall be donated to the
Florida National Guard Foundation. The foundation shall
distribute the funds to Florida National Guard members or their
relatives who are diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease. The funds
must be distributed as individual grants based on applications
submitted by the members or their relatives and reviewed and
approved by the Florida National Guard. The chief medical
officer of the Florida National Guard shall determine the amount
of each grant based on need.
4. The remainder of the proceeds shall be used to fund
activities, programs, and projects that educate Florida’s
students and residents about the contributions of the nation’s
40th President to this state and the United States and to
support ongoing research of Alzheimer’s disease for the benefit
of Florida residents who suffer from the disease and their
families.
Section 3. This act shall take effect October 1, 2018.