A bill to be entitled                      
An act relating to drones; amending s. 934.50, F.S.;
defining the terms “dangerous or deadly weapon” and
“large-scale event”; authorizing the use of a drone by
a law enforcement agency to prepare for or monitor
safety and security at a large-scale event;
prohibiting a law enforcement agency using a drone in
an authorized manner from equipping it with specified
attachments or using it to fire projectiles;
reenacting s. 330.41(4), F.S., relating to the
Unmanned Aircraft Systems Act, to incorporate the
amendment made to s. 934.50, F.S., in a reference
thereto; providing an effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:

Section 1. Present paragraphs (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e)
of subsection (2) of section 943.50, Florida Statutes, are
redesignated as paragraphs (b), (c), (d), (f), and (g),
respectively, and new paragraphs (a) and (e) are added to that
subsection, paragraph (a) of subsection (3) of that section is
amended, present paragraphs (d) through (j) of subsection (4) of
that section are redesignated as paragraphs (e) through (k),
respectively, and a new paragraph (d) is added to that
subsection, to read:
934.50 Searches and seizure using a drone.—
(2) DEFINITIONS.—As used in this act, the term:
(a) “Dangerous or deadly weapon” means a firearm or other
weapon, device, instrument, material, or substance, whether
animate or inanimate, which is used or is intended to be used in
a manner capable of causing death or serious bodily injury.
(e) “Large-scale event” means a public or private event
attended by more than 10 persons at a sports or entertainment
arena, a stadium, a convention hall, a special event center, an
amusement facility, an outdoor concert venue, a special event
area licensed or permitted for use under the authority of a unit
of local government, or an event open to the public that takes
place on a public way or on government-owned property.
(3) PROHIBITED USE OF DRONES.—
(a) A law enforcement agency may not use a drone to gather
evidence or other information, except as provided in subsection
(4).
(4) EXCEPTIONS.—This section does not prohibit the use of a
drone:
(d) If a law enforcement agency uses a drone to prepare for
or monitor safety and security at a large-scale event and the
drone use is limited to legitimate public safety purposes,
including, but not limited to, evaluating crowd size, density,
or movement; assessing public safety vulnerabilities or
weaknesses; determining appropriate staffing levels for law
enforcement or other public safety personnel; or identifying
possible criminal activity. If a law enforcement agency is using
a drone under this paragraph, the agency may not fire a
projectile from the drone or equip the drone with tear gas
canisters, stun gun technology, or any other dangerous or deadly
weapon.
Section 2. For the purpose of incorporating the amendment
made by this act to section 934.50, Florida Statutes, in a
reference thereto, subsection (4) of section 330.41, Florida
Statutes, is reenacted to read:
330.41 Unmanned Aircraft Systems Act.—
(4) PROTECTION OF CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITIES.—
(a) A person may not knowingly or willfully:
1. Operate a drone over a critical infrastructure facility;
2. Allow a drone to make contact with a critical
infrastructure facility, including any person or object on the
premises of or within the facility; or
3. Allow a drone to come within a distance of a critical
infrastructure facility that is close enough to interfere with
the operations of or cause a disturbance to the facility.
(b) A person who violates paragraph (a) commits a
misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in s.
775.082 or s. 775.083. A person who commits a second or
subsequent violation commits a misdemeanor of the first degree,
punishable as provided in s. 775.082 or s. 775.083.
(c) This subsection does not apply to actions identified in
paragraph (a) which are committed by:
1. A federal, state, or other governmental entity, or a
person under contract or otherwise acting under the direction of
a federal, state, or other governmental entity.
2. A law enforcement agency that is in compliance with s.
934.50, or a person under contract with or otherwise acting
under the direction of such law enforcement agency.
3. An owner, operator, or occupant of the critical
infrastructure facility, or a person who has prior written
consent of such owner, operator, or occupant.
(d) Subparagraph (a)1. does not apply to a drone operating
in transit for commercial purposes in compliance with Federal
Aviation Administration regulations, authorizations, or
exemptions.
(e) This subsection shall sunset 60 days after the date
that a process pursuant to s. 2209 of the FAA Extension, Safety
and Security Act of 2016 becomes effective.
Section 3. This act shall take effect July 1, 2019.