- 2018 LEGISLATURE
ASSEMBLY BILL 70
AN ACT to renumber and amend 38.12 (4), 59.14 (2), 62.11 (4) (a), 64.34 (1) and
120.11 (4); to amend 61.32 and 985.05 (1); and to create 38.12 (4) (b), 59.14 (2)
(b), 62.11 (4) (a) 2., 64.34 (1) (b) and 120.11 (4) (b) of the statutes; relating to:
publication of proceedings of meetings held by certain governmental bodies.
SECTION 1. 38.12 (4) of the statutes is renumbered 38.12 (4) (a) and amended
to read:
- 2018 Legislature                -2-                                    LRB-0506/2
38.12 (4) (a) The Except as provided in par. (b), the proceedings of the district
board meetings shall be published within 45 days after the meeting as a class 1
notice, under ch. 985, in a newspaper published in the district. If no newspaper is
published in the district, the proceedings may be publicized as the district board
directs. The publication of the proceedings shall include a statement of receipts and
expenditures in the aggregate. The district board shall make a detailed record of all
receipts and expenditures available to the public for inspection at each district board
meeting and upon request.
SECTION 2. 38.12 (4) (b) of the statutes is created to read:
38.12 (4) (b) In lieu of publishing the proceedings in a newspaper published in
the district, the district board may post the proceedings, including a statement of
receipts and expenditures in the aggregate, in at least one public place and place the
same proceedings electronically on an Internet site maintained by the board. If the
board elects to act under this paragraph, the board shall maintain the electronically
placed proceedings on the Internet site for at least 3 years.
SECTION 3. 59.14 (2) of the statutes is renumbered 59.14 (2) (a) and amended
to read:
59.14 (2) (a) The Except as provided in par. (b), the board shall, by ordinance
or resolution, provide for publication in one or more newspapers in the county as a
class 1 notice, under ch. 985, a certified copy of all its proceedings had at any meeting,
regular or special; said publication to be completed within 60 days after the
adjournment of each session.
SECTION 4. 59.14 (2) (b) of the statutes is created to read:
59.14 (2) (b) In lieu of publishing the proceedings in a newspaper published in
the county, the board may, by ordinance or resolution, provide for posting within 60
- 2018 Legislature               -3-                                     TKK:jld
days after the adjournment of each session of a certified copy of all its proceedings
in at least one public place and for placing the same proceedings electronically on an
Internet site maintained by the board.       If the board elects to act under this
paragraph, the board shall maintain the electronically placed proceedings on the
Internet site for at least 3 years.
SECTION 5. 61.32 of the statutes is amended to read:
61.32 Village board; meeting; salaries. The trustees of each village shall
constitute a board designated the “Village Board of" (name of village) in which shall
be vested all the powers of the village not specifically given some other officer. A
majority of the members-elect shall constitute a quorum, but a less number may
adjourn from time to time. The president shall preside at all meetings when present.
In the president's absence the board may select another trustee to preside. Regular
meetings shall be held at such time as may be prescribed by their bylaws. Special
meetings may be called by any 2 trustees in writing, filed with the clerk, who shall
thereupon seasonably notify all the trustees of the time and place thereof in the
manner directed by the bylaws. All meetings shall be open to the public. The board
shall keep a record of all its proceedings, and, except as provided in this section, if
there is a newspaper published in any village, the board shall cause the proceedings
to be published therein as a class 1 notice, under ch. 985. The proceedings for the
purpose of publication shall include the substance of every official action taken by
the governing body. In lieu of publishing the proceedings in a newspaper published
in a village, the board may post the proceedings in at least one public place and place
the same proceedings electronically on an Internet site maintained by the board. If
the board elects to post the proceedings in a public place and place the proceedings
electronically, the board shall maintain the electronically placed proceedings on the
- 2018 Legislature               -4-                                   LRB-0506/2
Internet site for at least 3 years. If there is no newspaper published in the village,
the board may cause the proceedings to be published in a newspaper having general
circulation in the village, posted in several public places or publicized in some other
fashion, in such manner as the board directs. Nothing herein shall be construed as
requiring the republication of any proceeding, ordinance or other matter or thing
which has already been published according to law, nor shall anything herein be
construed to relieve any village from publishing any proceeding, ordinance or other
matter or thing required by law to be published. Notwithstanding the provisions of
s. 985.08 (4), the fee for any such publication shall not exceed the rates specified in
s. 985.08 (1). The board has power to preserve order at its meetings, compel
attendance of trustees and punish nonattendance and it shall be judge of the election
and qualification of its members. The president and board of trustees of any village,
whether operating under general or special law, may by a three-fourths vote of all
the members of the village board determine that a salary be paid the president and
trustees.
SECTION 6. 62.11 (4) (a) of the statutes is renumbered 62.11 (4) (a) 1. and
amended to read:
62.11 (4) (a) 1. Proceedings Except as provided in subd. 2., proceedings of the
council shall be published in the newspaper designated under s. 985.06 as a class 1
notice, under ch. 985. The proceedings for the purpose of publication shall include
the substance of every official action taken by the governing body. Except as provided
in this subsection every ordinance shall be published either in its entirety, as a class
1 notice, under ch. 985, or as a notice, as described under par. (c) 2., within 15 days
of passage, and shall take effect on the day after the publication or at a later date if
expressly prescribed.
- 2018 Legislature               -5-                                       TKK:jld
SECTION 7. 62.11 (4) (a) 2. of the statutes is created to read:
62.11 (4) (a) 2. In lieu of publishing the proceedings of the council as provided
in subd. 1., the council may post the proceedings in at least one public place and place
the same proceedings electronically on an Internet site maintained by the council.
If the council elects to act under this subdivision, the council shall maintain the
electronically placed proceedings on the Internet site for at least 3 years.
SECTION 8. 64.34 (1) of the statutes is renumbered 64.34 (1) (a) and amended
to read:
64.34 (1) (a) The city comptroller shall each month prepare and present to the
council a summary statement of the revenues and expenses of the city for the
preceding month, detailed as to appropriations and funds, and arranged in standard
form, together with a balance sheet statement of the current assets and current
liabilities of such city at the close of such month. These summaries shall be
accompanied by such detailed schedules as the council may by ordinance require.
The Except as provided in par. (b), the full detailed acts and proceedings of the council
at every general or special meeting thereof, including the full text of all reports filed
and presented at such meeting, shall be published as a class 1 notice, under ch. 985,
subsequent to the day of each such council meeting; and in. Except as provided in
par. (b), in the months of January, April, July, and October the council shall cause to
be published as a class 1 notice, under ch. 985, detailed schedules of the receipts and
disbursements of moneys for the 3 calendar months next preceding the month of such
publication. The compensation to be paid for such publications shall not exceed the
rate provided by law for the publication of legal notices.
SECTION 9. 64.34 (1) (b) of the statutes is created to read:
- 2018 Legislature               -6-                                   LRB-0506/2
64.34 (1) (b) In lieu of publishing the acts and proceedings of every general and
special meeting of the council as provided under par. (a), the council may, subsequent
to the day of the council meeting, post the acts and proceedings in at least one public
place and place the same acts and proceedings electronically on an Internet site
maintained by the council. In lieu of publishing the detailed schedules as provided
in par. (a), the council may, in the months of January, April, July, and October, post
the detailed schedules in at least one public place and place the same detailed
schedules electronically on an Internet site maintained by the council. If the council
elects to act under this paragraph, the council shall maintain the electronically
placed acts, proceedings, and detailed schedules on the Internet site for at least 3
years.
SECTION 10.     120.11 (4) of the statutes is renumbered 120.11 (4) (a) and
amended to read:
120.11 (4) (a) The Except as provided in par. (b), the proceedings of a school
board meeting shall be published within 45 days after the meeting as a class 1 notice,
under ch. 985, in a newspaper published in the school district, if any, or publicized
by school district-wide distribution prepared and directed by the school board and
paid out of school funds. If there is no newspaper published in the school district, the
proceedings shall be posted or published as the school board directs. For the purpose
of publication, the proceedings shall include the substance of every official action
taken by the school board at the meeting and a statement of receipts and
expenditures in the aggregate. The school board shall make a detailed record of all
receipts and expenditures available to the public for inspection at each regular school
board meeting and upon request.
SECTION 11. 120.11 (4) (b) of the statutes is created to read:
- 2018 Legislature               -7-                                    TKK:jld
120.11 (4) (b) In lieu of publishing the proceedings in a newspaper published
in the school district, the school board may post the proceedings, as defined in par.
(a), in at least one public place and place the same proceedings electronically on an
Internet site maintained by the board. If the school board elects to act under this
paragraph, the board shall maintain the electronically placed proceedings on the
Internet site for at least 3 years.
SECTION 12. 985.05 (1) of the statutes is amended to read:
985.05 (1) The governing body of every municipality not required to have an
official newspaper may designate a newspaper published or having general
circulation in the municipality and eligible under s. 985.03 as its official newspaper
or utilize the same for specific notices. The governing body of such municipality may,
in lieu of newspaper publication, direct other form of publication or posting under s.
985.02 (2). Other publication or posting, however, shall not be substituted for
newspaper publication in proceedings relating to: tax redemptions or sales of land
acquired by the county or city authorized to act under s. 74.87 for delinquent taxes,
charges or assessments; civil annexations, detachments, consolidations or
incorporations under chs. 59 to 66; or legal notices directed to specific individuals.
Posting may not be substituted for publication in school board elections conducted
under s. 120.06 or publication under s. 60.80 (2) of town ordinances imposing
forfeitures.   If an eligible newspaper is published in the municipality, other
publication or posting shall not be substituted for newspaper publication under s.
61.32 or 61.50.
(END)