- 2018 LEGISLATURE
ASSEMBLY BILL 820
AN ACT       to create 895.08 of the statutes; relating to: the standard of proof
required to effect a temporary or permanent closure of a sport shooting range
based on an unsafe condition.
- 2018 Legislature                -2-                                  LRB-4820/2
SECTION 1. 895.08 of the statutes is created to read:
895.08 Sport shooting ranges; actions related to safety. (1) DEFINITIONS.
In this section:
(a) “Clear and immediate public safety hazard" means an unsafe condition that
originates from, or is at, a sport shooting range and that could reasonably be expected
to cause death or serious injury to an individual.
(b) “Local unit of government" means the governing body of a county, city, town,
village, or the elected tribal governing body of a federally recognized American
Indian tribe or band in this state.
(c) “Sport shooting range" has the meaning given in s. 895.527 (1).
(2) TEMPORARY CLOSURE GENERALLY PROHIBITED. (a) Except as provided in pars.
(b) and (c), no law enforcement officer or court may require the owner or operator of
a sport shooting range to cease or suspend any portion of its operation because of an
alleged or actual unsafe condition at, or originating from, the sport shooting range.
(b) A law enforcement officer may order the owner or operator of a sport
shooting range to cease or suspend a portion of its operation if he or she has probable
cause to believe that the portion of the operation constitutes a clear and immediate
public safety hazard.     A law enforcement officer may not order cessation or
suspension of any portion of the sport shooting range's operation that he or she does
not have probable cause to believe constitutes a clear and immediate public safety
- 2018 Legislature               -3-                                  MLJ:kjf&wlj
hazard and may not order cessation or suspension under this paragraph for more
than 72 hours.
(c) 1. A court may, upon petition by a local unit of government or an individual,
order the owner or operator of a sport shooting range to cease or suspend a portion
of its operation if the court finds, upon a preponderance of the evidence presented,
that the portion of the sport shooting range's operation constitutes a clear and
immediate public safety hazard.
2. There is a rebuttable presumption that no portion of a sport shooting range's
operation constitutes a clear and immediate public safety hazard.
3. No court may order cessation or suspension of any portion of the sport
shooting range's operation that it does not find to constitute a clear and immediate
public safety hazard. No court may order cessation or suspension under this
paragraph for more than 72 hours. A court that orders cessation or suspension under
this paragraph shall proceed under sub. (3).
(3) INVESTIGATION, FINDINGS, AND ORDERS FOR REMEDIATION. (a) Upon issuing an
order under sub. (2) (c), a court shall order the petitioner to submit, not later than
5 days after it issues the order, a report from an investigator that identifies any
unsafe condition at, or originating from, a sport shooting range and that identifies
whether or not the unsafe condition constitutes a clear and immediate public safety
hazard that may warrant permanent cessation of any portion of the sport shooting
range's operation.
(b)   A court may find that an unsafe condition may warrant permanent
cessation of any portion of the sport shooting range's operation only upon finding that
an alleged unsafe condition caused or led to one or more documented events that
- 2018 Legislature               -4-                                  LRB-4820/2
caused immediate danger to the life or safety of an individual and that the alleged
unsafe condition constitutes a clear and immediate public safety hazard.
(c) Upon finding that there is a clear and immediate public safety hazard that
may warrant permanent cessation of any portion of the sport shooting range's
operation, the court shall order the owner or operator of a sport shooting range to
remedy the condition in order to eliminate the clear and immediate public safety
hazard. A court may issue or extend an order to cease or suspend the portion of the
sport shooting range's operation that constitutes a clear and immediate public safety
hazard but may not order the owner or operator of a sport shooting range to cease
or suspend any portion of the sport shooting range's operation that does not
constitute a clear and immediate public safety hazard.
(d) Upon a showing by the owner or operator of the sport shooting range that
he or she has eliminated each condition identified as constituting a clear and
immediate public safety hazard under par. (c), the court shall lift all orders for
suspension or cessation of the portion of the sport shooting range's operation relating
to the condition.
(e) A court may order permanent cessation of the sport shooting range's
operation only upon finding that a sport shooting range refuses or is unable to comply
with an order under par. (c).
(f) If a court dismisses a petition filed by a local unit of government or an
individual on the grounds that the petitioner is unable to demonstrate that a portion
of a sport shooting range's operation constitutes a clear and immediate public safety
hazard, the court may order the petitioner to pay the defending party's costs of
litigation, including reasonable attorneys fees.
SECTION 2.0Initial applicability.
- 2018 Legislature              -5-                                 MLJ:kjf&wlj
(1) This act first applies retroactively to a petition filed or an order entered
against a sport shooting range before the effective date of this subsection.
(END)