- 2018 LEGISLATURE
SENATE BILL 723
AN ACT to repeal 70.105, 70.47 (7) (c), 70.47 (8) (j), 70.47 (16) (c), 74.37 (4) (d) and
74.37 (6); and to amend 70.47 (8) (d), 70.47 (13), 70.47 (16) (a), 73.03 (2a) and
74.37 (4) (c) of the statutes; relating to: changes to board of review proceedings
and elimination of the property tax assessment freeze (suggested as remedial
legislation by the Department of Revenue).
Wis. 2d 85, 796 N.W.2d 717, and Nankin v. Village of Shorewood, 2001 WI 92, 245
(1967), the Wisconsin Supreme Court held that the uniformity clause of the
- 2018 Legislature                      -2-                                       LRB-5256/1
SECTION 1. 70.105 of the statutes is repealed.
SECTION 2. 70.47 (7) (c) of the statutes is repealed.
SECTION 3. 70.47 (8) (d) of the statutes is amended to read:
70.47 (8) (d) It may and upon request of either the assessor or the objector shall
compel the attendance of witnesses for hearing, except objectors who may testify by
telephone, and the production of all books, inventories, appraisals, documents and
other data which may throw light upon the value of property, and, with regard to an
objection that is subject to sub. (7) (c) or (16) (c), may, on a showing of good cause,
compel the attendance of witnesses for depositions.
SECTION 4. 70.47 (8) (j) of the statutes is repealed.
- 2018 Legislature               -3-                           JK&KRP:kjf/jld/emw
SECTION 5. 70.47 (13) of the statutes is amended to read:
70.47 (13) REVIEW CERTIORARI. Except as provided in this subsection and in ss.
s. 70.85 and 74.37, appeal from the determination of the board of review shall be by
an action for certiorari commenced within 90 days after the taxpayer receives the
notice under sub. (12). The action shall be given preference. If the court on the appeal
finds any error in the proceedings of the board which renders the assessment or the
proceedings void, or if the court determines that the board lacked good cause to deny
a request for a deposition subpoena, it shall remand the assessment to the board for
further proceedings in accordance with the court's determination and retain
jurisdiction of the matter until the board has determined an assessment in
accordance with the court's order. For this purpose, if final adjournment of the board
occurs prior to the court's decision on the appeal, the court may order the governing
body of the assessing authority to reconvene the board. If the appellant challenges
the value determination that the board made at a proceeding under sub. (7) (c), the
court shall presume that the board's valuation is correct, except that the
presumption may be rebutted by a sufficient showing by the appellant that the
valuation is incorrect. If the presumption is rebutted, the court shall determine the
assessment without deference to the board of review and based on the record before
the board of review, except that the court may consider evidence that was not
available at the time of the hearing before the board, that the board refused to
consider, or that the court otherwise determines should be considered in order to
determine the correct assessment. In the event that an objection to the previous
year's assessment has not been resolved, the parties may agree that the assessment
for the previous year shall also apply for the current year and shall be included in
- 2018 Legislature               -4-                                  LRB-5256/1
the court's review of the prior year's assessment without an additional hearing by the
board.
SECTION 6. 70.47 (16) (a) of the statutes is amended to read:
70.47 (16) (a) In 1st class cities all objections to the amount or valuation of real
or personal property shall be first made in writing and filed with the commissioner
of assessments on or before the 3rd Monday in May. No person may, in any action
or proceeding, question the amount or valuation of real or personal property in the
assessment rolls of the city unless objections have been so filed. The board may not
waive the requirement that objections be in writing. Persons who own land and
improvements to that land may object to the aggregate valuation of that land and
improvements to that land, but no person who owns land and improvements to that
land may object only to the valuation of that land or only to the valuation of
improvements to that land. If the objections have been investigated by a committee
of the board of assessors under s. 70.07 (6), the board of review may adopt the
recommendation of the committee unless the objector requests or the board orders
a hearing. At least 2 days' notice of the time fixed for the hearing shall be given to
the objector or attorney and to the city attorney of the city. The provisions of the
statutes relating to boards of review not inconsistent with this subsection apply to
proceedings before the boards of review of 1st class cities, except that the board need
not adjourn until the assessment roll is completed by the commissioner of
assessments, as required in s. 70.07 (6), but may immediately hold hearings on
objections filed with the commissioner of assessments, and the changes, corrections
and determinations made by the board acting within its powers shall be prima facie
correct. Appeal from the determination shall be by an action under sub. (13) for
certiorari commenced within 90 days after the taxpayer receives the notice under
- 2018 Legislature               -5-                            JK&KRP:kjf/jld/emw
sub. (12). The action shall be given preference. If the court on the appeal finds any
error in the proceedings of the board that renders the assessment or the proceedings
void or, with regard to an objection that is subject to par. (c), if the court determines
that the board lacked good cause to deny a request for a deposition subpoena, it shall
remand the assessment to the board for further proceedings in accordance with the
court's determination and retain jurisdiction of the matter until the board has
determined an assessment in accordance with the court's order. If the appellant
challenges the value determination that the board made at a proceeding under sub.
(16) (c), the court shall presume that the board's valuation is correct, except that the
presumption may be rebutted by a sufficient showing by the appellant that the
valuation is incorrect. If the presumption is rebutted, the court shall determine the
assessment without deference to the board of review and based on the record before
the board of review, except that the court may consider evidence that was not
available at the time of the hearing before the board or that the board refused to
consider, or that the court otherwise determines should be considered in order to
determine the correct assessment. In the event that an objection to the previous
year's assessment has not been resolved, the parties may agree that the assessment
for the previous year shall also apply for the current year and shall be included in
the court's review of the prior year's assessment without an additional hearing by the
board.
SECTION 7. 70.47 (16) (c) of the statutes is repealed.
SECTION 8. 73.03 (2a) of the statutes is amended to read:
73.03 (2a) To prepare and publish, in electronic form and on the Internet,
assessment manuals. The manual shall discuss and illustrate accepted assessment
methods, techniques and practices with a view to more nearly uniform and more
- 2018 Legislature               -6-                                LRB-5256/1
consistent assessments of property at the local level. The manual shall be amended
by the department from time to time to reflect advances in the science of assessment,
court decisions concerning assessment practices, costs, and statistical and other
information considered valuable to local assessors by the department. The manual
shall incorporate standards for the assessment of all types of renewable energy
resource systems used in this state as soon as such systems are used in sufficient
numbers and sufficient data exists to allow the formulation of valid guidelines. The
manual shall incorporate standards, which the department of revenue and the state
historical society of Wisconsin shall develop, for the assessment of nonhistoric
property in historic districts and for the assessment of historic property, including
but not limited to property that is being preserved or restored; property that is
subject to a protective easement, covenant or other restriction for historic
preservation purposes; property that is listed in the national register of historic
places in Wisconsin or in this state's register of historic places and property that is
designated as a historic landmark and is subject to restrictions imposed by a
municipality or by a landmarks commission. The manual shall incorporate general
guidelines about ways to determine whether property is taxable in part under s.
70.1105 and examples of the ways that s. 70.1105 applies in specific situations. The
manual shall state that assessors are required to comply with s. 70.32 (1g) and shall
suggest procedures for doing so. The manual or a supplement to it shall specify per
acre value guidelines for each municipality for various categories of agricultural land
based on the income that could be generated from its estimated rental for
agricultural use, as defined by rule, and capitalization rates established by rule. The
manual shall include guidelines for classifying land as agricultural land, as defined
in s. 70.32 (2) (c) 1g., and guidelines for distinguishing between land and
- 2018 Legislature                  -7-                               JK&KRP:kjf/jld/emw
improvements to land. The manual shall specify the evidence to be exchanged under
s. 70.47 (7) (c) and (16) (c). The cost of the development, preparation, and Internet
publication of the manual and of revisions and amendments to it shall be paid from
the appropriation under s. 20.566 (2) (bm).
SECTION 9. 74.37 (4) (c) of the statutes is amended to read:
74.37 (4) (c) No claim or action for an excessive assessment may be brought or
maintained under this section if the assessment of the property for the same year is
contested under s. 70.47 (7) (c), (13), or (16) (c) or 70.85. No assessment may be
contested under s. 70.47 (7) (c), (13), or (16) (c) or 70.85 if a claim is brought and
maintained under this section based on the same assessment.
SECTION 10. 74.37 (4) (d) of the statutes is repealed.
SECTION 11. 74.37 (6) of the statutes is repealed.
SECTION 12.0Initial applicability.
(1) The treatment of section 70.105 of the statutes first applies to taxes based
on the assessment as of the January 1 after publication.
(END)