- 2018 LEGISLATURE
ASSEMBLY BILL 233
AN ACT relating to:     submitting a state plan under the Every Student Succeeds
Act.
- 2018 Legislature               -2-                                   LRB-2724/1
SECTION 1.0Nonstatutory provisions.
(1) DEFINITIONS. In this SECTION:
(a) “Department” means the department of public instruction.
(b) “State plan” means the plan the department is required to file with the
secretary of the federal department of education under 20 USC 6311 (a) (1).
(2) SUBMITTAL OF STATE PLAN. The department may not submit a state plan to
the secretary of the federal department of education until the department does all
of the following:
(a)   For a proposed state plan the department submits to the assembly
committee on education or to the senate committee on education before May 15, 2017,
provides the committee the opportunity to object to the proposed state plan in
accordance with subsection (3).
(b) Responds to any objections submitted by the assembly committee on
education and the senate committee on education in accordance with subsection (4).
(3) PROCEDURE FOR COMMITTEE OBJECTIONS.
(a) A member of the assembly committee on education or the senate committee
on education who wishes to object to any portion of the proposed state plan submitted
to that committee before May 15, 2017, shall submit his or her objection in writing
to the chairperson of his or her committee no later than May 25, 2017, or 5 days after
the effective date of this paragraph, whichever is later.
- 2018 Legislature               -3-                                     FFK:jld
(b) If the chairperson of the assembly committee on education or of the senate
committee on education receives an objection under paragraph (a), the chairperson
shall schedule a committee meeting for the purpose of reviewing all objections
received by the chairperson under paragraph (a). The chairperson shall schedule the
committee hearing for a date that is no later than 7 days after the applicable deadline
for making objections under paragraph (a). At the committee hearing, the committee
shall approve or disapprove each objection received by the chairperson under
paragraph (a). If the chairperson of the assembly committee on education or the
senate committee on education does not schedule a meeting under this paragraph,
the department may proceed as if that committee has no objections to the proposed
state plan.
(c) Within 5 days after a committee meeting to review objections to the proposed
state plan, the chairperson of the assembly committee on education or the senate
committee on education shall submit to the department all of the objections approved
by that committee. If the chairperson of the assembly committee on education or the
senate committee on education does not submit objections to the department by the
deadline provided in this paragraph, the department may proceed as if that
committee has no objections to the proposed state plan.
(4) RESPONSES TO OBJECTIONS. No later than 14 days after receiving an objection
from a committee under subsection (3) (c), the department shall provide the
committee a written response to each objection submitted by the committee. For
each objection, the department shall include all of the following in the written
response:
(a) A statement of whether the department will modify the state plan to address
that objection.
- 2018 Legislature              -4-                                 LRB-2724/1
(b)   If the department will modify the state plan, a description of the
modification.
(c) If the department will not modify the state plan, an explanation for why the
department will not modify the state plan.
(END)