- 2018 LEGISLATURE
SENATE BILL 492
AN ACT      to create 950.04 (1v) (df), 971.313 and 974.05 (1) (e) of the statutes;
relating to: obtaining crime victim mental health treatment records.
- 2018 Legislature               -2-                                 LRB-0532/3
SECTION 1. 950.04 (1v) (df) of the statutes is created to read:
950.04 (1v) (df) To privacy in his or her confidential mental health treatment
records, in accordance with the procedure under s. 971.313.
SECTION 2. 971.313 of the statutes is created to read:
971.313     Obtaining victim mental health treatment records.                  (1)
DEFINITIONS. In this section:
(a) “Crime victim” has the meaning given for “victim” in s. 950.02 (4) or a
guardian ad litem appointed under sub. (3) (c) 2. if a person identified under s. 950.02
(4) (a) 2. has interests that are adverse to a child victim.
(b) “Mental health treatment records” means all records that are not in the
possession of a government agency that are created in the course of providing
services to individuals for mental illness, developmental disabilities, alcoholism,
drug dependence, or other mental health issues and that are maintained by
treatment facilities as defined in s. 51.01 (19), by psychologists licensed under s.
- 2018 Legislature               -3-                           MLJ&TJD:klm&wlj
455.04 (1), or by licensed mental health professionals as defined in s. 51.01 (11m).
“Mental health treatment records” does not include psychotherapy notes, as defined
in 45 CFR 164.501, that are maintained for personal use and kept separate from
other mental health treatment records.
(c) “Necessary to any articulated defense” means that the evidence supports
any articulated defense by tending to create reasonable doubt that would not
otherwise exist.
(2)   MOTION      FOR DISCOVERY OF MENTAL HEALTH TREATMENT RECORDS.            (a)
Notwithstanding ss. 51.30 (4) (b) 4. and 146.82 (2) (a) 4., a defendant seeking
discovery of a person's mental health treatment records shall file a confidential
motion, sealed under s. 801.20, at least 45 days before trial, unless the court extends
the time for filing upon a specific finding of good cause, including when there has
been new discovery.
(b) In a motion under par. (a), the defendant shall submit a good faith offer of
proof and a supporting affidavit from someone with personal knowledge that
indicates all of the following:
1. The specific information that is sought from the mental health treatment
records.
2. That there are mental health treatment records that are reasonably likely
to contain the information sought under subd. 1.
3. That the specific information sought under subd. 1. is necessary to any
articulated defense.
4. That the mental health treatment records are the only source for the
information sought under subd. 1.
- 2018 Legislature              -4-                                LRB-0532/3
5. That the information sought under subd. 1. is not cumulative to evidence
already available.
(c) The following offers of proof alone are not sufficient to determine whether
the defendant has met his or her burden of proof to obtain a person's mental health
treatment records under par. (b):
1. That the crime victim reported or failed to report a victimization.
2. That the crime victim sought or received counseling or mental health
treatment for a prior or current victimization.
3. That the crime victim received counseling or mental health treatment to
address personal or family issues.
(3) NOTIFICATION REQUIRED; CRIME VICTIM RIGHTS. (a) The prosecuting attorney
shall notify the crime victim whose mental health treatment records are being
sought of all of the following:
1. That a motion has been filed under sub. (2) (a) requesting his or her mental
health treatment records.
2. That he or she has the right to the assistance of counsel regarding the issue
of access to his or her mental health treatment records.
3. That he or she may consent or decline to consent to an in camera review of
his or her mental health treatment records.
4. That by consenting to an in camera review, he or she has not waived any
privilege under s. 905.11 or 905.12 to object to redisclosure of the privileged
information or the use of any privileged information in a subsequent court
proceeding after the court's review and determination under sub. (4).
- 2018 Legislature              -5-                            MLJ&TJD:klm&wlj
(b) The prosecuting attorney may respond to the motion made under sub. (2)
(a) with affidavits or written arguments, which shall be filed confidentially and
sealed under s. 801.20.
(c) 1. The crime victim whose mental health treatment records are being sought
has the right to counsel. The crime victim may retain counsel who may intervene in
this proceeding on his or her behalf. The court shall provide the crime victim
reasonable time to secure counsel and may appoint counsel upon the victim's request.
The counsel may file a response to the filing made under sub. (2) (a) with affidavits
or written arguments, which shall be filed confidentially and sealed under s. 801.20.
2. If the victim of the crime is a child, and the court determines that a person
identified under s. 950.02 (4) (a) 2. has interests that are adverse to the child, the
court shall appoint a guardian ad litem. The guardian ad litem shall be an advocate
for the best interests of the child.       The guardian ad litem shall function
independently in the same manner as the counsel identified under subd. 1.
(4) IN CAMERA REVIEW; DETERMINATION OF WHETHER DISCLOSURE IS WARRANTED. (a)
If the court concludes by a preponderance of the evidence both that the defendant has
made the showing required by sub. (2) (b) and that the potential benefit to the
defendant from disclosure outweighs the harm to the crime victim from disclosure,
the court shall inquire as to whether the crime victim consents to an in camera review
of the mental health treatment records by the court.
(b) 1. If the crime victim does not consent to an in camera review of his or her
mental health treatment records by the court, the court shall follow the procedures
in sub. (6) (a).
2. If the crime victim consents to an in camera review of his or her mental health
treatment records by the court, the court shall examine the mental health treatment
- 2018 Legislature                -6-                                 LRB-0532/3
records in camera for the presence of any evidence that is necessary to any
articulated defense.
(c) Following an in camera review of the mental health treatment records under
par. (b) 2., the court may order the disclosure of the relevant records only if the court
determines by clear and convincing evidence one of the following:
1. That the information in the mental health treatment records is necessary to
any articulated defense and that the benefit to the defendant from disclosure
outweighs the harm to the crime victim from disclosure.
2. That the information in the mental health treatment records is exculpatory
by tending to create reasonable doubt that would not otherwise exist.
(d) If the court determines under par. (c) that some or all of the mental health
treatment records are eligible for disclosure, the crime victim shall have the
opportunity to review the records identified for disclosure. Within 45 days from the
date of the order under par. (c), the crime victim and the state shall notify the court
whether the crime victim or the state intends to appeal the order pursuant to s.
974.05, and if neither the crime victim nor the state intends to appeal the order, the
crime victim shall indicate whether he or she consents or declines to consent to the
disclosure of the relevant records. If the crime victim or the state appeals the order
under par. (c) within 45 days, the crime victim's mental health treatment records
may not be disclosed until the appeal has concluded.
(e) 1. After the appeal under par. (d) has concluded, the crime victim shall
indicate whether he or she consents to the disclosure of his or her mental health
treatment records.
2. If the crime victim does not consent to the disclosure of the mental health
treatment records under par. (d) after the appeal has concluded or after the state and
- 2018 Legislature               -7-                            MLJ&TJD:klm&wlj
the crime victim each indicate that he or she or it does not intend to appeal the order,
the court shall follow the procedures in sub. (6) (b).
3. If the crime victim consents to the disclosure of the mental health treatment
records after the appeal has concluded or after the state and the crime victim each
indicate that he or she or it does not intend to appeal the order, the court shall order
disclosure of those records to the prosecuting attorney and to the defendant's
attorney in accordance with the procedures in sub. (5).
(5) DISCLOSURE    OF INFORMATION; DISSEMINATION PROHIBITED.      (a) If the court
orders disclosure of mental health treatment records, the order may include only
those mental health treatment records or portions of mental health treatment
records that are necessary to any articulated defense or are otherwise exculpatory.
(b) If the court orders disclosure of mental health treatment records, the court
shall enter a protective order under s. 971.23 (6) that provides that any record or
information provided to the prosecuting attorney and to the defendant's attorney
shall be confidential and may not be redisclosed or disseminated by the prosecuting
attorney or the defendant's attorney unless specifically authorized by the court. Any
provided record or information in paper form shall be returned to the court at the
conclusion of representation. Any provided or stored electronic record or information
shall be deleted at the conclusion of the representation by the prosecuting attorney
and the defendant's attorney, both of whom shall provide the court with an affidavit
affirming that the records or information have been deleted.
(c) The court shall determine the admissibility of any disclosed mental health
treatment records under the applicable rules of evidence.
(d) The court shall retain any mental health treatment records under seal for
the applicable period of time as specified in SCR 72.01.
- 2018 Legislature                -8-                                 LRB-0532/3
(6) CRIME   VICTIM NONCONSENT; APPEALS OF COURT DECISIONS REGARDING MENTAL
HEALTH TREATMENT RECORDS.      (a) If the crime victim does not consent to in camera
review of his or her mental health treatment records, the court shall do all of the
following:
1. Abide by the declination of the crime victim.
2. Permit the crime victim to testify at the trial.
3. If the case is tried by a jury, inform the jury of all of the following:
a. That the crime victim declined to disclose mental health treatment records
for inspection by the court.
b. That the crime victim has the right to decline an in camera review of the
mental health treatment records.
4. Notwithstanding any prohibition under s. 905.11 or 905.12, permit comment
on the declination by the crime victim and allow the defendant to draw any
reasonable inference therefrom.
(b) If the crime victim does not consent to disclosure of his or her mental health
treatment records following an in camera review, the court shall prohibit the crime
victim from testifying at the trial and the court may not order disclosure of the crime
victim's mental health treatment records.
(c) Any of the following orders of the court may be appealed to the court of
appeals as a matter of right by the state under s. 974.05 or by the crime victim in the
manner under s. 974.05:
1. The order of the court determining that the defendant has met his or her
burden of proof under sub. (2) (b), triggering an in camera review of mental health
treatment records.
- 2018 Legislature              -9-                             MLJ&TJD:klm&wlj
2. The order of the court determining that the mental health treatment records
should be disclosed under sub. (4) (c).
(7) PRIVILEGE. The consent of a crime victim to review of mental health
treatment records under sub. (4) (a) or disclosure of mental health treatment records
under sub. (4) (d) does not waive any privilege under s. 905.11 or 905.12. A crime
victim may still claim any applicable privilege for confidential communications or for
information reviewed or disclosed under this section.
(8) PSYCHOTHERAPY NOTES. Except for uses or disclosures described in 45 CFR
164.508 (a) (2) (i) and (ii), a defendant may not obtain and a court may not order
disclosure of psychotherapy notes, as defined in 45 CFR 164.501, that are
maintained for personal use and kept separate from other mental health treatment
records unless the crime victim voluntarily provides an authorization in accordance
with 45 CFR 164.508 to disclose psychotherapy notes.
SECTION 3. 974.05 (1) (e) of the statutes is created to read:
974.05 (1) (e) Order granting relief under s. 971.313 (6) (c) 1. or 2.
SECTION 4.0Effective date.
(1) This act takes effect on October 1, 2017.
(END)