- 2018 LEGISLATURE
SENATE BILL 460
AN ACT to create 16.75 (3r), 36.25 (54), 71.05 (6) (b) 53., 71.05 (6) (b) 54., 71.26
(1) (ab), 71.26 (2) (a) 13., 71.26 (2) (a) 14., 71.26 (2) (a) 15., 73.17 and 238.147
of the statutes; relating to: providing loans, loan guarantees, tax benefits, and
procurement preferences to employee-owned companies, establishing a center
for employee ownership in the University of Wisconsin System, and granting
rule-making authority.
- 2018 Legislature               -2-                                 LRB-0361/2
SECTION 1. 16.75 (3r) of the statutes is created to read:
16.75 (3r) (a) In this subsection:
1. “Direct share ownership plan” has the meaning given in s. 73.17 (1) (a).
2. “Employee ownership trust” has the meaning given in s. 73.17 (1) (e).
3. “Employee stock ownership plan” has the meaning given in s. 73.17 (1) (f).
4. “Qualified transfer” has the meaning given in s. 73.17 (1) (h).
5. “Tenured employee” has the meaning given in s. 73.17 (1) (i).
(b) 1.   The department, any agency to which the department delegates
purchasing authority under s. 16.71 (1), and any agency making purchases under s.
16.74 shall attempt to ensure that 5 percent of the total amount expended under this
subchapter in each fiscal year is paid to businesses that satisfy any of the following:
a. A percentage, as established by the department by rule, of employer stock
or membership interest, of the type required for a qualified transfer, is held by an
employee stock ownership plan or employee ownership trust.
- 2018 Legislature               -3-                         AG/JK/MPG:amn&wlj
b. A percentage, as established by the department by rule, of employer stock
or membership interest, of the type required for a qualified transfer, is held through
a direct share ownership plan where the ownership stake of the direct share
ownership plan is calculated by determining the smallest amount of such stock or
membership interest held by a tenured employee, multiplied by the total number of
tenured employees.
c.   A percentage, as established by the department by rule, of nonprofit
corporation membership, with voting power equal to or in excess of that class of
membership having the greatest voting power, is held by all tenured employees as
a class, and the tenured employees vote as members on a one person, one vote basis.
2. Except as provided under sub. (7), the department, any agency to which the
department delegates purchasing authority under s. 16.71 (1), and any agency
making purchases under s. 16.74 may purchase materials, supplies, equipment, and
contractual services from any business specified in subd. 1. a., b., or c. submitting a
qualified responsible competitive bid that is no more than 5 percent higher than the
apparent low bid or competitive proposal that is no more than 5 percent higher than
the most advantageous proposal. In administering the preference for businesses
specified in subd. 1. a., b., and c. established in this paragraph, the department, the
delegated agency, and any agency making purchases under s. 16.74 shall maximize
the use of businesses specified in subd. 1. a., b., and c. that are incorporated under
ch. 180 or that have their principal place of business in this state.
SECTION 2. 36.25 (54) of the statutes is created to read:
36.25 (54) CENTER FOR EMPLOYEE OWNERSHIP. (a) The board shall establish and
maintain a center for employee ownership at a location within the system
determined by the board.
- 2018 Legislature                -4-                                 LRB-0361/2
(b) The center for employee ownership shall do all of the following:
1. Provide education and outreach to inform business owners about the benefits
of employee ownership successions and the provisions of ss. 16.75 (3r) (b), 71.05 (6)
(b) 53. and 54., 71.26 (1) (ab) and (2) (a) 13., 14., and 15., 73.17, and 238.147.
2. Organize workshops and conferences on employee ownership successions.
3.    Prepare and distribute materials concerning employee ownership
successions.
4. Provide initial consultations to business owners exploring the possibility of
transferring full or partial ownership to employees.
5. Provide a referral service to help business owners find legal, financial, and
technical advice in connection with employee ownership successions.
6. Partner with key organizations, such as professional and trade associations,
financial institutions, unions, economic development organizations, and other
nonprofit entities, to promote employee ownership successions.
7. Support the growth of associations of employee-owned companies.
(c) In addition to its responsibilities under par. (b), the center for employee
ownership shall do all of the following:
1. Provide access to information regarding government rules and regulations
that relate to employee ownership.
2.   Develop, in partnership with appropriate state and local government
agencies, proposals for changes in policies to promote employee ownership.
3. Conduct investigations, research, studies, and analyses on the subject of
employee ownership.
SECTION 3. 71.05 (6) (b) 53. of the statutes is created to read:
- 2018 Legislature                  -5-                         AG/JK/MPG:amn&wlj
71.05 (6) (b) 53. For taxable years beginning after December 31, 2016, income,
including all gains not excluded from taxation under subd. 9., derived from a
qualified transfer, as defined in s. 73.17 (1) (h), except that the amount of income
derived from the qualified transfer to a direct share ownership plan, as defined in s.
73.17 (1) (a), that may be excluded under this subdivision may not exceed the amount
of income derived in the taxable year from the smallest amount of shares or member
interests transferred to a tenured employee, as defined in s. 73.17 (1) (i), multiplied
by the number of all tenured employees.
SECTION 4. 71.05 (6) (b) 54. of the statutes is created to read:
71.05 (6) (b) 54. For taxable years beginning after December 31, 2016, income
derived from shares or member interests distributed through a direct share
ownership plan, as defined in s. 73.17 (1) (a), except that the amount of the income
that may be excluded under this subdivision may not exceed the amount of income
derived in the taxable year from the smallest amount of shares or member interests
distributed to a tenured employee, as defined in s. 73.17 (1) (i).
SECTION 5. 71.26 (1) (ab) of the statutes is created to read:
71.26 (1) (ab) Employee ownership trust. Income of an employee ownership
trust, as defined in s. 73.17 (1) (e).
SECTION 6. 71.26 (2) (a) 13. of the statutes is created to read:
71.26 (2) (a) 13. For taxable years beginning after December 31, 2016, minus
the amount of the interest income derived from an employee ownership loan, as
defined in s. 73.17 (1) (d).
SECTION 7. 71.26 (2) (a) 14. of the statutes is created to read:
71.26 (2) (a) 14. a. For taxable years beginning after December 31, 2016, minus
the amount of contributions to an employee ownership trust, as defined in s. 73.17
- 2018 Legislature               -6-                                 LRB-0361/2
(1) (e), or to a direct share ownership plan, as defined in s. 73.17 (1) (a), including
contributions applied to repayment of principal and interest on an employee
ownership loan, as defined in s. 73.17 (1) (d).
b. The exclusion under subd. 14. a. is subject to the limits under section 404 (a)
(3) (A) of the Internal Revenue Code. The amount of the exclusion under subd. 14.
a. for contributions to a direct share ownership plan may not exceed the value in the
taxable year of the smallest amount of shares or member interests distributed to a
tenured employee, as defined in s. 73.17 (1) (i), multiplied by the number of all
tenured employees.
c. Contributions under this subdivision may be in cash, shares, or member
interests. For purposes of this subdivision, the taxpayer shall submit with the
taxpayer's return a copy of the findings of an independent appraiser regarding the
fair market value of shares or member interests.
SECTION 8. 71.26 (2) (a) 15. of the statutes is created to read:
71.26 (2) (a) 15. For taxable years beginning after December 31, 2016, minus
the amount of dividends payable to an employee ownership trust, as defined in s.
73.17 (1) (e), or to a direct share ownership plan, as defined in s. 73.17 (1) (a). The
amount of the exclusion under this subdivision for dividends payable to a direct
share ownership plan may not exceed an amount equal to the dividends payable to
the employee owning the fewest number of shares, multiplied by the number of all
tenured employees.
SECTION 9. 73.17 of the statutes is created to read:
73.17 Employee ownership. (1) DEFINITIONS. In this section:
(a) “Direct share ownership plan” means an arrangement in which a portion
of the highest class of voting shares of a corporation or voting interest of a member
- 2018 Legislature              -7-                        AG/JK/MPG:amn&wlj
of a limited liability company is held directly by all tenured employees. The shares
or interest may be nontransferable and callable upon termination or retirement of
the employee.
(b) “Eligible transaction” means the qualified transfer of some or all of the
shares of a corporation or member interests of a limited liability company to an
employee stock ownership plan, employee ownership trust, or direct share
ownership plan. An eligible transaction includes an acquisition of shares or member
interests by an employee ownership association, as an intermediary, for the purpose
of a qualified transfer to an employee stock ownership plan, employee ownership
trust, or direct share ownership plan.
(c) “Employee ownership association” means a corporation, limited liability
company, trust, or other entity that acts on behalf of the employees of an existing
employer for the purpose of achieving the qualified transfer of some or all of the
shares or member interests of the employer to ownership by an employee stock
ownership plan, employee ownership trust, or direct share ownership plan. An
employee ownership association includes a corporation or limited liability company
with an existing employee stock ownership plan, employee ownership trust, or direct
share ownership plan that acts on behalf of the employees of another employer for
the purpose of achieving a qualified transfer by means of a consolidation or merger.
(d) “Employee ownership loan” means any of the following:
1.   Any loan to a corporation, limited liability company, employee stock
ownership plan, employee ownership trust, or employee ownership association, to
the extent that the proceeds are used to acquire shares or member interests of an
employer for a qualified transfer.
- 2018 Legislature               -8-                                  LRB-0361/2
2. Any loan to a corporation or limited liability company to the extent that,
within 30 days, shares or member interests of an employer are transferred to an
employee stock ownership plan, employee ownership trust, or direct share
ownership plan in an amount equal to the loan and in accordance with the terms of
a qualified transfer.
(e) “Employee ownership trust” means a trust, including a foreign trust, that
holds the highest class of voting shares of a corporation or voting interest of a member
of a limited liability company and that meets the requirements under sub. (2) (a), and
may be a noncharitable trust, perpetual trust, or both.
(f) “Employee stock ownership plan” means an employee stock ownership plan,
as defined in section 4975 (e) (7) of the Internal Revenue Code.
(g) “Employer” includes 2 or more persons who are treated as a single employer
under section 414 (b), (c), (m), or (o) of the Internal Revenue Code.
(h) “Qualified transfer” means the transfer of any amount of shares of a
corporation or member interests of a limited liability company to an employee stock
ownership plan, employee ownership trust, or direct share ownership plan if all of
the following apply:
1. The shares or member interests have voting power equal to or in excess of
the class of common shares or member interests of the employer having the greatest
voting power.
2. The shares or member interests have dividend rights equal to or in excess
of the class of common shares or member interests of the employer having the
greatest dividend rights.
3. If the transfer is to a direct share ownership plan, the largest amount of
shares or member interests transferred to any employee does not exceed a multiple
- 2018 Legislature               -9-                         AG/JK/MPG:amn&wlj
of 10 times the smallest amount of shares or member interests transferred to any
tenured employee.
(i) “Tenured employee” means any employee or independent contractor who has
provided at least 1,000 hours of services to the employer within the immediately
preceding 12-month period unless, with respect to an employee ownership trust or
a direct share ownership plan, a lower number of hours is established in the terms
of the employee ownership trust or direct share ownership plan.
(2) EMPLOYEE OWNERSHIP TRUSTS. (a) Sections 71.05 (6) (b) 53. and 54. and 71.26
(1) (ab) and (2) (a) 13., 14., and 15. apply to an employee ownership trust only if all
of the following apply:
1. a. Subject to subd. 1. b., c., d., and e., the employee ownership trust has the
exclusive purposes of creating employee ownership by obtaining and holding shares
or member interests of an employer and of promoting the financial and nonfinancial
interests of all tenured employees.
b.   The exclusive purposes of an employee ownership trust may include
preserving the ability of all tenured employees to exercise the voting rights of the
trust on a one person, one vote basis. This subd. 1. b. does not exempt the trustee
from an obligation to carry out the express terms and purpose of the trust in the case
of a conflict with the majority decision of all tenured employees.
c. The exclusive purposes of an employee ownership trust may include holding
shares or member interests of an employer in perpetuity and preserving the
employer in perpetuity.
d. The exclusive purposes of an employee ownership trust may refer to both
current and prospective tenured employees.
- 2018 Legislature              - 10 -                              LRB-0361/2
e. An employee ownership trust may prioritize certain exclusive purposes over
others.
2. No principal or income of the employee ownership trust is distributed or
allocated to any party other than a tenured employee, except that principal and
income of the trust may be distributed to one or more charitable organizations. The
employee ownership trust may distribute principal to current and past tenured
employees if the trust sells shares or member interests of the employer by
establishing a cutoff date for the inclusion of past tenured employees.
3. Principal and income of the employee ownership trust that is distributed or
allocated to employees is administered proportionally to all tenured employees on
the basis of hours worked, salary, seniority, or any combination of these factors.
(b) 1. An employee ownership trust may limit trustee liability in a manner
authorized under subch. X of ch. 701 if the shares or member interests of the
employer are voted by the trustee in accordance with the direction of all tenured
employees and on a one person, one vote basis and all of the following apply:
a. The trustee votes all employer shares or member interests as a unit in
accordance with the majority decision of all tenured employees.
b.   Before voting, the trustee furnishes each tenured employee with the
information statement and other materials provided to shareholders or members in
connection with the shareholder or member meeting, together with a form on which
confidential voting directions may be given to the trustee or, if the trustee is not
independent of the employer, to an independent 3rd party designated by the trustee,
who tabulates votes and provides instructions to the trustee. The trustee or a 3rd
party may not disclose the confidential voting directions of any tenured employee to
the employer.
- 2018 Legislature                 - 11 -                         AG/JK/MPG:amn&wlj
2. This paragraph does not exempt the trustee from an obligation to carry out
the express terms and purpose of the trust in the case of a conflict with the majority
decision of all tenured employees.
(c) An employee ownership trust is not disqualified from any benefit available
under s. 71.05 (6) (b) 53. or 54. or 71.26 (1) (ab) or (2) (a) 13., 14., or 15. solely because
the terms of the trust do any of the following:
1. Authorize the trustee to employ an entity, such as a corporation, a limited
liability company, or another trust, to hold the shares or member interests of the
employer.
2. Require that the employer obtain membership in one or more nonprofit
associations.
3. Require that the employer pay market rate wages or benefits or both.
4. Require that the employer retain a percentage of annual net income as
permanent reserves that will never be distributed to employees.
5. Impose other requirements to promote the long-term financial health of the
employer and the continued ability of the employer to provide high-quality jobs
under conditions of employee ownership to all current and prospective tenured
employees.
6. Appoint a trust protector or cotrustee or both to enforce the trust and approve
amendments to the trust.
SECTION 10. 238.147 of the statutes is created to read:
238.147      Employee ownership loans and loan guarantees.                           (1)
DEFINITIONS. In this section:
(a) “Eligible transaction” has the meaning given in s. 73.17 (1) (b).
(b) “Employee ownership association” has the meaning given in s. 73.17 (1) (c).
- 2018 Legislature              - 12 -                                 LRB-0361/2
(c) “Employee ownership loan” has the meaning given in s. 73.17 (1) (d).
(d) “Total cost” means all reasonable and necessary costs to be incurred in the
course of an eligible transaction, including the fair market value of the business
interest to be acquired, as well as costs for any additional construction, land
acquisition, improvements, equipment, pertinent rights and easements, and
associated technical, engineering, legal, and financial services.
(2) ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM. The corporation shall establish and administer
an economic development program under this section to make employee ownership
loans and employee ownership loan guarantees to eligible applicants.
(3) APPLICATION. Any corporation, limited liability company, trust, or employee
ownership association may apply to the corporation for an employee ownership loan
or employee ownership loan guarantee or both to finance an eligible transaction.
(4) LOANS    AND LOAN GUARANTEES.        The corporation may contract with an
applicant under sub. (3) to do any of the following:
(a) Make an employee ownership loan to the applicant equal to up to 40 percent
of the total cost. At least 50 percent of a loan made under this paragraph shall be
senior debt.
(b) Guarantee up to 100 percent of employee ownership loans made to the
applicant by lenders other than the corporation. All loan guarantees made to an
applicant under this paragraph may not exceed 80 percent of the total cost.
(5) TIMELINESS. The corporation shall make a loan decision or a loan guarantee
decision under sub. (4), and inform the applicant of the corporation's decision, no
later than 30 days after the corporation receives the applicant's application for an
employee ownership loan or employee ownership loan guarantee under sub. (3). If
the corporation requests that an applicant supplement its application by submitting
- 2018 Legislature             - 13 -                      AG/JK/MPG:amn&wlj
additional information, the corporation shall have an additional 15 days after
receiving the additional information by which the corporation must make a loan
decision or a loan guarantee decision under sub. (4) and inform the applicant of the
corporation's decision.
SECTION 11.0Nonstatutory provisions.
(1) CENTER FOR EMPLOYEE OWNERSHIP. The Board of Regents of the University
of Wisconsin System shall establish the center for employee ownership under section
36.25 (54) of the statutes no later than 180 days after the effective date of this
subsection.
(END)