- 2018 LEGISLATURE
AN ACT      to create 49.79 (7g) of the statutes; relating to: photo identification
cards for FoodShare recipients.
- 2018 Legislature               -2-                                  LRB-5280/1
SECTION 1. 49.79 (7g) of the statutes is created to read:
49.79 (7g) FOOD STAMP PHOTO IDENTIFICATION CARDS. (a) In this subsection, “food
and nutrition service" means the food and nutrition service of the U.S. department
of agriculture.
(b) 1. The department shall submit a comprehensive implementation plan to
the food and nutrition service as required by the food and nutrition service guidelines
and federal regulations for allowing electronic benefit transfer cards containing a
photograph. The department shall address in the implementation plan the issues
required by the federal food and nutrition service for allowing photographs on
electronic benefit transfer cards, including supplemental nutrition assistance
program policies, operational issues, outreach, civil rights concerns, procedures to
ensure that authorized representatives are able to use the card, and a description of
how the department will ensure state compliance with federal requirements.
2. Along with the implementation plan, the department shall submit a request
for a waiver from the U.S. department of agriculture to allow the department to
require that an individual show an electronic benefit card containing a photograph
when making a purchase using food stamp benefits.
(c)   If the food and nutrition service grants written approval of the
implementation plan, and the U.S. department of agriculture approves the waiver,
the department shall submit the implementation plan, the waiver, and any
necessary appropriation requests to implement the plan to the joint committee on
- 2018 Legislature             -3-                                   SWB:klm
finance for approval. The department or a county, multicounty consortium, or
elected governing body may not implement the proposals contained in the
implementation plan under par. (b) unless the joint committee on finance grants
approval of both the implementation plan and the waiver.
(d) If the department receives approval of both the implementation plan and
the waiver under par. (c), then the department, or a county, multicounty consortium,
or elected governing body of a federally recognized American Indian tribe or band
acting on behalf of the department, shall issue, consistent with provisions of the
implementation plan, food stamp identification cards to food stamp recipients that
contain a photograph of the individual to whom the card is issued, and shall require
an individual to show an electronic benefit card containing a photograph when
making a purchase using food stamp benefits.
(END)