- 2018 LEGISLATURE
AN ACT to create 16.298, 20.505 (1) (rm), 25.17 (1) (kq) and 25.76 of the statutes;
relating to: pay for success contracting, establishment of pay for success trust
fund, and making an appropriation.
- 2018 Legislature                -2-                                  LRB-5282/1
SECTION 1. 16.298 of the statutes is created to read:
16.298 Pay for success contracting. (1) DEFINITIONS. In this section:
(a) “Eligible services” means social, employment, or correctional services, as
determined by the department.
(b) “Fund” means the pay for success trust fund.
(c) “Pay for success contract” means a contract authorized under sub. (2) (a).
(d) “Service provider” means a private organization, whether operated for
profit or not for profit, that provides eligible services to individuals.
(2) CONTRACT EXECUTION. (a) The department may contract, including jointly
with another state agency or a local governmental unit, with a service provider for
the payment of moneys to the service provider for the provision of eligible services
to individuals.
(b) Each pay for success contract shall provide all of the following:
1. That a majority of the total contract payment is conditioned on the service
provider achieving performance measures, as specified in the contract, toward the
outcome of the contract objectives.
2. A defined objective procedure by which an independent evaluator is required
to determine whether the performance measures specified under subd. 1. have been
achieved.
- 2018 Legislature                -3-                                     MPG:ahe
3. A schedule of the amounts and timing of payments to be earned by the service
provider during each year or other specified period of the contract.
(c) For each pay for success contract, the department may not execute the
contract unless all of the following occur first:
1. The department determines that the contract is expected to result in
significant performance improvements or significant budgetary savings for the state
or, if appropriate, a local governmental unit, if the contract objectives specified in the
proposed contract are achieved.
2. The department notifies the joint committee on finance in writing of the
proposed contract.     The notification shall describe in detail the department's
proposal for the contract. If the cochairpersons of the committee do not notify the
department within 14 working days after the date of the department's notification
that the committee has scheduled a meeting for the purpose of reviewing the
proposed contract, the department may execute the contract as proposed in its
notification subject to subds. 1. and 3. If, within 14 working days after the date of
the department's notification, the cochairpersons of the committee notify the
department that the committee has scheduled a meeting for the purpose of reviewing
the proposed contract, the department may execute the contract only with the
approval of the committee.
3. The department makes the deposit under sub. (4) (a).
(3)   CONTRACT    PAYMENTS.     For each pay for success contract, from the
appropriation under s. 20.505 (1) (rm), the department shall make payments under
sub. (2) (b) 3. subject to the contract terms.
(4) FUND    ADMINISTRATION.    (a) For each pay for success contract, subject to
approval of the contract by the joint committee on finance under sub. (2) (c) 2., the
- 2018 Legislature                -4-                                 LRB-5282/1
secretary shall transfer to the fund from the general fund an amount sufficient to
administer the contract and make all payments that may become due under sub. (2)
(b) 3. over the effective period of the contract.
(b) For each pay for success contract, the secretary shall transfer to the general
fund from the fund all of the following:
1. If the contract is terminated or otherwise expires, an amount equal to the
amount transferred in the fund under par. (a) but not expended under the contract.
2.   All amounts the department recovers from a service provider for
overpayment or for another amount recovered by the department under the terms
of a pay for success contract.
(c) The balance of the fund may not exceed $20,000,000 at any time.
(5) REPORTS. (a) Upon completion of each pay for success contract, the
department shall submit a report to the appropriate standing committees of the
legislature under s. 13.172 (3) that describes in detail the performance measures
specified for the contract under sub. (2) (b) 1. and the extent to which those
performance measures were achieved.
(b) Upon completion of each pay for success contract under which another state
agency jointly contracts with the department under sub. (2) (a), the other state
agency shall submit to the appropriate standing committees of the legislature under
s. 13.172 (3) a report that describes in detail the outcomes of the contract.
(6) PURCHASING EXEMPTION. A contract is subject to ss. 16.753 and 16.765, but
is otherwise exempt from subch. IV.
SECTION 2. 20.505 (1) (rm) of the statutes is created to read:
- 2018 Legislature              -5-                                    MPG:ahe
20.505 (1) (rm) Pay for success contracting. From the pay for success trust fund,
all moneys transferred under s. 16.298 (4) for the purpose of administering and
making payments for pay for success contracts under s. 16.298.
SECTION 3. 25.17 (1) (kq) of the statutes is created to read:
25.17 (1) (kq) Pay for success trust fund (s. 25.76);
SECTION 4. 25.76 of the statutes is created to read:
25.76   Pay for success trust fund.          There is established a separate
nonlapsible trust fund designated as the pay for success trust fund consisting of
transfers made by the department of administration under s. 16.298 (4) (a).
SECTION 5.0Nonstatutory provisions.
(1)   AGENCY   STUDIES AND REPORTS.     The departments of health services,
corrections, children and families, and workforce development shall each conduct a
study of the programs it administers to determine whether and how pay for success
contracting under section 16.298 of the statutes could be utilized as an alternative
to current funding models for the provision of services under the programs. Each of
those departments shall submit to the joint committee on finance and the
appropriate standing committees of the legislature under section 13.172 (3) of the
statutes a report that details its findings from the study.
(END)