- 2018 LEGISLATURE
AN ACT to amend 20.435 (5) (bw); and to create 51.448 of the statutes; relating
to: addiction medicine consultation program and making an appropriation.
- 2018 Legislature              -2-                                 LRB-1909/1
SECTION 1. 20.435 (5) (bw) of the statutes is amended to read:
20.435 (5) (bw) Child psychiatry and addiction medicine consultation program
programs. Biennially, the amounts in the schedule for operating the child psychiatry
consultation program under s. 51.442 and the addiction medicine consultation
program under s. 51.448.
SECTION 2. 51.448 of the statutes is created to read:
51.448 Addiction medicine consultation program. (1) In this section,
“participating clinicians" includes physicians, nurse practitioners, and physician
assistants.
(2) Beginning July 1, 2017, the department shall create and administer an
addiction medicine consultation program to assist participating clinicians in
providing enhanced care to patients with substance use addiction and to provide
referral support for patients with a substance abuse disorder, and to provide
additional services described in this section. The addiction medicine consultation
program created under this section is not an emergency referral service.
(3) The department shall review proposals submitted by organizations seeking
to provide consultation services through the addiction medicine consultation
program under this section and shall designate sites, in a number determined by the
department, based on the submitted proposals. The department shall select and
provide moneys to organizations to provide consultation services through the
- 2018 Legislature              -3-                                TJD:amn&wlj
addiction medicine consultation program in a manner that maximizes medically
appropriate access and services as described under sub. (4).
(4) The department shall select qualified organizations to provide addiction
medicine consultation program services through the sites designated in sub. (3).
Each site shall make available its own qualified provider or consortium of providers.
To be a qualified provider in the addiction medicine consultation program under this
section, an organization shall successfully demonstrate it meets all of the following
criteria:
(a) The organization has the required infrastructure to be located within the
geographic service area of the proposed site.
(b) Any individual who would be providing consulting services through the
addiction medicine consultation program is located in this state.
(c) The organization enters into a contract with the department agreeing to
satisfy all of the following criteria as a condition of providing services through the
addiction medicine consultation program:
1. The organization has at the time of participation in the addiction medicine
consultation program a physician who is board-certified in addiction psychiatry or
addiction medicine.
2. The organization operates during the normal business hours of Monday to
Friday between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m., excluding holidays.
3. The organization shall be able to provide consultation services as promptly
as is practicable.
4. The organization shall provide all of the following services:
- 2018 Legislature               -4-                                   LRB-1909/1
a. Support for participating clinicians to assist in the management of addiction
or substance abuse and to provide referral support for patients with a substance use
addiction.
b. A triage-level assessment to determine the most appropriate response to
each request, including appropriate referrals to other mental health professionals.
c. When medically appropriate, diagnostic and therapeutic feedback.
d. Recruitment of other practices in the site's service territory to the provider's
services.
5. The organization shall have the capability to provide consultation services
by telephone, at a minimum.
(5) (a)    An organization that provides consultation services through the
addiction medicine consultation program under this section may provide services by
teleconference, video conference, voice over Internet protocol, electronic mail, pager,
or in-person conference.
(b) The organization that provides consultation services through the addiction
medicine consultation program under this section may provide any of the following
services, which are eligible for funding from the department:
1.     Second opinion diagnostic and medication management evaluations
conducted either by a physician who is board-certified in addiction psychiatry or
addiction medicine or a physician with extensive and documented experience in
treating substance use disorders, either by in-person conference or by
teleconference, video conference, or voice over Internet protocol.
2.     In-person or Internet site-based educational seminars and refresher
courses provided to any participating clinician who uses the addiction medicine
consultation program on a medically appropriate topic within addiction medicine.
- 2018 Legislature               -5-                                TJD:amn&wlj
(6) An organization that provides consultation services through the addiction
medicine consultation program under this section shall report to the department any
information as requested by the department.
(7) An organization that provides consultation services through the addiction
medicine consultation program under this section shall do all of the following:
(a) Conduct annual surveys of participating clinicians who use the addiction
medicine consultation program under this section to assess the amount of addiction
medicine consultation provided, self-perceived levels of confidence in providing
addiction medicine services, and the satisfaction with the consultations and the
educational opportunities provided.
(b) Immediately after a clinical practice group begins using the addiction
medicine consultation program under this section and again 6 to 12 months later,
conduct an interview of participating clinicians from that practice group to assess the
barriers to and benefits of participation to make future improvements and to
determine the participating clinician's treatment abilities, confidence, and
awareness of relevant resources before and after using the addiction medicine
consultation program.
(c)   Annually, submit to the department survey results under par. (a),
summaries of interviews under par. (b), and a description of the impact of the
program under this section.
SECTION 3.0Fiscal changes.
(1) ADDICTION MEDICINE CONSULTATION PROGRAM. In the schedule under section
20.005 (3) of the statutes for the appropriation to the department of health services
under section 20.435 (5) (bw) of the statutes, the dollar amount for fiscal year
2017-18 is increased by $500,000 to create and operate the addiction medicine
- 2018 Legislature                -6-                                   LRB-1909/1
consultation program under section 51.448 of the statutes. In the schedule under
section 20.005 (3) of the statutes for the appropriation to the department of health
services under section 20.435 (5) (bw) of the statutes, the dollar amount for fiscal year
2018-19 is increased by $500,000 to create and operate the addiction medicine
consultation program under section 51.448 of the statutes.
SECTION 4.0Effective dates. This act takes effect on the day after publication,
except as follows:
(1) The treatment of section 20.435 (5) (bw) of the statutes takes effect on July
1, 2017.
(END)