- 2018 LEGISLATURE
AN ACT to create 16.314 of the statutes; relating to: employment screening of
and employability plans for residents in public housing.
- 2018 Legislature              -2-                                 LRB-5289/1
SECTION 1. 16.314 of the statutes is created to read:
16.314 Employability plans for public housing residents. (1) In this
section:
(a) “Controlled substance" has the meaning given in s. 961.01 (4).
(b) “Controlled substance abuse screening” means a questionnaire, a criminal
background check, or any other controlled substance abuse screening mechanism
identified by the department.
(2) To the extent allowed under federal law, the department shall require that
each housing authority do all of the following:
(a) Conduct screening to determine whether each adult resident in public
housing administered by the housing authority is able-bodied and either
unemployed or underemployed.
(b) For each resident the housing authority determines under par. (a) is
able-bodied and either unemployed or underemployed, create an employability plan
for the resident and require the resident to participate in the plan.
(c) 1. For each resident the housing authority determines under par. (a) is
able-bodied and either unemployed or underemployed, require the resident to
complete a controlled substance abuse screening. If, on the basis of the controlled
substance abuse screening results, the housing authority determines that there is
a reasonable suspicion that the resident is abusing a controlled substance, the
- 2018 Legislature             -3-                                 MPG:klm&wlj
housing authority shall require the resident to undergo a test for the use of a
controlled substance.
2. If a resident who undergoes a test under subd. 1. tests positive for the use
of a controlled substance without presenting evidence satisfactory to the housing
authority that the resident possesses a valid prescription for each controlled
substance for which he or she tests positive, the housing authority shall offer the
resident the opportunity to participate in substance abuse treatment.
(END)