CONCERNING THE SCHEDULED REPEAL OF REPORTS BY THE JUDICIAL
DEPARTMENT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Colorado:
SECTION 1. In Colorado Revised Statutes, repeal 13-1-137 as
follows:
13-1-137. Reporting of data concerning juvenile proceedings.
(1) The judicial branch shall report annually to the judiciary committees
of the house of representatives and senate, or to any successor
committees, information concerning:
(a) The number of juvenile delinquency cases;
(b) The number of juvenile delinquency cases that involved an
appointment of counsel;
(c) The number of juvenile cases that involved a waiver of
counsel;
(d) The status of recommended reviews to juvenile court rules,
forms, and chief justice directives regarding the representation of children
in juvenile delinquency courts; and
(e) The number of juvenile delinquency cases that involved a
detention hearing, the number of juveniles who were released after the
detention hearing, and the number of juveniles who remained in detention
after the detention hearing.
SECTION 2. In Colorado Revised Statutes, 13-3-115, amend (6)
as follows:
13-3-115. Diversion funding committee. (6) NOTWITHSTANDING
SECTION 24-1-136     (11)(a)(I), by January 31, 2015, and each January 31
thereafter, the judicial department shall provide to the joint budget
committee a status report that includes the information required by
subsection (5) of this section.
SECTION 3. In Colorado Revised Statutes, 13-91-105, amend
(1)(i) as follows:
13-91-105. Duties of the office of the child's representative -
guardian ad litem programs - CASA programs. (1) In addition to any
responsibilities assigned to it by the chief justice, the office of the child's
representative shall:
(i) NOTWITHSTANDING SECTION 24-1-136 (11)(a)(I), report the
activities of the office of the child's representative to the members of the
general assembly and to the state court administrator's office, together
with the reports specified in paragraph (h) of this subsection (1), on or
before September 1, 2001, and on or before September 1 of each year
thereafter.
SECTION 4. In Colorado Revised Statutes, 13-92-104, amend
(1)(e) as follows:
13-92-104. Duties of the office of the respondent parents'
counsel. (1) The office has the following duties, at a minimum:
(e) Annually reviewing and evaluating the office's performance
to determine whether the office is effectively and efficiently meeting the
goals of improving child and family well-being and the duties set forth in
this section. The report must be submitted on or before January 1, 2017,
and annually thereafter, to the members of the general assembly and the
state court administrator's office.
SECTION 5. In Colorado Revised Statutes, 16-4-106, amend (6)
introductory portion as follows:
16-4-106. Pretrial services programs. (6) Commencing July 1,
2012, each pretrial services program established pursuant to this section
shall provide an annual report to the judicial department no later than
November 1 of each year, regardless of whether the program existed prior
to May 31, 1991. The judicial department shall present an annual
combined report to the house and senate judiciary committees of the
house of representatives and the senate, or any successor committees, of
the general assembly. The report to the judicial department must include,
but is not limited to, the following information:
SECTION 6. In Colorado Revised Statutes, repeal 18-1.3-1011
as follows:
18-1.3-1011. Annual report. (1) On or before November 1,
2000, and on or before each November 1 thereafter, the department of
corrections, the department of public safety, and the judicial department
shall submit a report to the judiciary committees of the house of
representatives and the senate, or any successor committees, and to the
joint budget committee of the general assembly specifying, at a minimum:
(a) The impact on the prison population, the parole population,
and the probation population in the state due to the extended length of
incarceration and supervision provided for in sections 18-1.3-1004,
18-1.3-1006, and 18-1.3-1008;
(b) The number of offenders placed in the intensive supervision
parole program and the intensive supervision probation program and the
length of supervision of offenders in said programs;
(c) The number of sex offenders sentenced pursuant to this part
10 who received parole release hearings and the number released on
parole during the preceding twelve months, if any;
(d) The number of sex offenders sentenced pursuant to this part
10 who received parole or probation discharge hearings and the number
discharged from parole or probation during the preceding twelve months,
if any;
(e) The number of sex offenders sentenced pursuant to this part
10 who received parole or probation revocation hearings and the number
whose parole or probation was revoked during the preceding twelve
months, if any;
(f) A summary of the evaluation instruments developed by the
management board and use of the evaluation instruments in evaluating
sex offenders pursuant to this part 10;
(g)   The availability of sex offender treatment providers
throughout the state, including location of the treatment providers, the
services provided, and the amount paid by offenders and by the state for
the services provided, and the manner of regulation and review of the
services provided by sex offender treatment providers;
(h) The average number of sex offenders sentenced pursuant to
this part 10 that participated in phase I and phase II of the department's
sex offender treatment and monitoring program during each month of the
preceding twelve months;
(i) The number of sex offenders sentenced pursuant to this part 10
who were denied admission to treatment in phase I and phase II of the
department's sex offender treatment and monitoring program for reasons
other than length of remaining sentence during each month of the
preceding twelve months;
(j) The number of sex offenders sentenced pursuant to this part 10
who were terminated from phase I and phase II of the department's sex
offender treatment and monitoring program during the preceding twelve
months and the reason for termination in each case;
(k) The average length of participation by sex offenders sentenced
pursuant to this part 10 in phase I and phase II of the department's sex
offender treatment and monitoring program during the preceding twelve
months;
(l) The number of sex offenders sentenced pursuant to this part 10
who were denied readmission to phase I and phase II of the department's
sex offender treatment and monitoring program after having previously
been terminated from the program during the preceding twelve months;
(m) The number of sex offenders sentenced pursuant to this part
10 who were recommended by the department's sex offender treatment
and monitoring program to the parole board for release on parole during
the preceding twelve months and whether the recommendation was
followed in each case; and
(n) The number of sex offenders sentenced pursuant to this part
10 who were recommended by the department's sex offender treatment
and monitoring program for placement in community corrections during
the preceding twelve months and whether the recommendation was
followed in each case.
SECTION 7. In Colorado Revised Statutes, 18-3-414.5, amend
(4) introductory portion as follows:
18-3-414.5. Sexually violent predators - assessment - annual
report. (4) On or before January 15, 2008, and on or before January 15
each year thereafter, the judicial department and the department of
corrections shall jointly submit to the judiciary committees of the senate
and the house of representatives, or any successor committees, to the
division of criminal justice in the department of public safety and to the
governor a report specifying the following information:
SECTION 8. In Colorado Revised Statutes, 19-2-907, amend
(5)(a) as follows:
19-2-907. Sentencing schedule - options. (5) (a) Except as
otherwise provided in section 19-2-601 for an aggravated juvenile
offender, if the court finds that placement out of the home is necessary
and is in the best interests of the juvenile and the community, the court
shall place the juvenile, following the criteria established pursuant to
section 19-2-212, in the facility or setting that most appropriately meets
the needs of the juvenile, the juvenile's family, and the community. In
making its decision as to proper placement, the court shall utilize the
evaluation for placement prepared pursuant to section 19-1-107 or the
evaluation for placement required by section 19-1-115 (8)(e). Any
placement recommendation in the evaluation prepared by the county
department of social services shall be accorded great weight as the
placement that most appropriately meets the needs of the juvenile, the
juvenile's family, and the community. Such recommendation prepared by
the county department of social services shall set forth specific facts and
reasons for the placement recommendation. If the evaluation for
placement recommends placement in a facility located in Colorado that
can provide appropriate treatment and that will accept the juvenile, then
the court shall not place the juvenile in a facility outside this state. If the
court places the juvenile in a facility located in Colorado other than one
recommended by the evaluation for placement, in a facility located
outside this state in accordance with the evaluation for placement, or in
a facility in which the average monthly cost exceeds the amount
established by the general assembly in the general appropriation bill, it
shall make specific findings of fact, including the monthly cost of the
facility in which such juvenile is placed, relating to its placement
decision. A copy of such findings shall be sent to the chief justice of the
supreme court. who shall report monthly to the joint budget committee
and annually to the house and senate committees on health and human
services, or any successor committees, on such placements. If the court
commits the juvenile to the department of human services, it shall not
make a specific placement, nor shall the provisions of this subsection (5)
relating to specific findings of fact be applicable.
SECTION 9. Effective date. (1) Except as otherwise provided
in this section, this act takes effect upon passage.
(2) Section 4 of this act takes effect January 2, 2020.
SECTION 10. Safety clause. The general assembly hereby finds,
determines, and declares that this act is necessary for the immediate
preservation of the public peace, health, and safety.