

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Subject to the requirements of article
IV, part 1, section 1, Constitution of Arizona, section 36-2801, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE36-2801.  Definitions

In this
chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:

1.  "Allowable
amount of marijuana"

(a)  With
respect to a qualifying patient, the "allowable amount of marijuana"
means: 

(i)  Two-and-one-half
ounces of usable marijuana; and

(ii)  If
the qualifying patient's registry identification card states that the
qualifying patient is authorized to cultivate marijuana, twelve marijuana
plants contained in an enclosed, locked facility, except that the plants are not
required to be in an enclosed, locked facility if the plants are being
transported because the qualifying patient is moving.

(b)  With
respect to a designated caregiver, the "allowable amount of
marijuana" for each patient assisted by the designated caregiver under
this chapter means: 

(i)  Two-and-one-half
ounces of usable marijuana; and

(ii)  If
the designated caregiver's registry identification card provides that the
designated caregiver is authorized to cultivate marijuana, twelve marijuana
plants contained in an enclosed, locked facility, except that the plants are not
required to be in an enclosed, locked facility if the plants are being
transported because the designated caregiver is moving.

(c)  Marijuana
that is incidental to medical use, but is not usable marijuana as defined in
this chapter, shall not be counted toward a qualifying patient's or designated
caregiver's allowable amount of marijuana.

2.  "Cardholder"
means a qualifying patient, a designated caregiver or a nonprofit medical
marijuana dispensary agent who has been issued and possesses a valid registry
identification card.

3.  "Debilitating
medical condition" means one or more of the following:

(a)  Cancer,
glaucoma, positive status for human immunodeficiency virus, acquired immune
deficiency syndrome, hepatitis C, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Crohn's
disease, opioid
use disorder, agitation
of Alzheimer's disease or the treatment of these conditions.

(b)  A
chronic or debilitating disease or medical condition or its treatment that
produces one or more of the following: 

(i)  Cachexia or wasting syndrome. ; 

(ii)  Severe and chronic pain. ; 

(iii)  Severe nausea. ; 

(iv)  Seizures, including those
characteristic of epilepsy.
; or

(v)  Severe and persistent muscle
spasms, including those characteristic of multiple sclerosis.

(c)  Any
other medical condition or its treatment added by the department pursuant to
section 36‑2801.01.

4.  "Department"
means the Arizona department of health services or
its successor agency.

5.  "Designated
caregiver" means a person who: 

(a)  Is
at least twenty‑one years of age.

(b)  Has
agreed to assist with a patient's medical use of marijuana. 

(c)  Has
not been convicted of an excluded felony offense.

(d)  Assists
no more than five qualifying patients with the medical use of marijuana.

(e)  May
receive reimbursement for actual costs incurred in assisting a registered
qualifying patient's medical use of marijuana if the registered designated
caregiver is connected to the registered qualifying patient through the
department's registration process. The designated caregiver may not be paid any
fee or compensation for his service as a caregiver.  Payment
for costs under this subdivision shall not constitute an offense under title
13, chapter 34 or under title 36, chapter 27, article 4.

6.  "Enclosed,
locked facility" means a closet, room, greenhouse or other enclosed area
equipped with locks or other security devices that permit access only by a
cardholder.

7.  "Excluded
felony offense" means: 

(a)  A
violent crime as defined in section 13-901.03, subsection B, that was
classified as a felony in the jurisdiction where the person was convicted. 

(b)  A
violation of a state or federal controlled substance law that was classified as
a felony in the jurisdiction where the person was convicted but does not
include:

(i)  An
offense for which the sentence, including any term of probation, incarceration
or supervised release, was completed ten or more years earlier.

(ii)  An
offense involving conduct that would be immune from arrest, prosecution or
penalty under section 36-2811,
except that the conduct occurred before the effective date of this chapter December 14, 2010 or was prosecuted by an authority
other than the state of Arizona.

8.  "Marijuana"
means all parts of any plant of the genus cannabis whether growing or not, and
the seeds of such plant. 

9.  "Medical
use" means the acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture, use,
administration, delivery, transfer or transportation of marijuana or
paraphernalia relating to the administration of marijuana to treat or alleviate
a registered qualifying patient's debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated
with the patient's debilitating medical condition.

11.  10.  "Nonprofit medical marijuana
dispensary" means a not-for-profit entity that acquires, possesses,
cultivates, manufactures, delivers, transfers, transports, supplies, sells or
dispenses marijuana or related supplies and educational materials to
cardholders.  A nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary may receive
payment for all expenses incurred in its operation.

10.  11.  "Nonprofit medical marijuana
dispensary agent" means a principal officer, board member, employee or
volunteer of a nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary who is at least
twenty-one years of age and has not been convicted of an excluded felony
offense.

12.  "Physician"
means a doctor of medicine who holds a valid and existing license to practice
medicine pursuant to title 32, chapter 13 or its successor, a doctor of
osteopathic medicine who holds a valid and existing license to practice
osteopathic medicine pursuant to title 32, chapter 17 or its successor, a
naturopathic physician who holds a valid and existing license to practice
naturopathic medicine pursuant to title 32, chapter 14 or its successor or a
homeopathic physician who holds a valid and existing license to practice
homeopathic medicine pursuant to title 32, chapter 29 or its successor.

13.  "Qualifying
patient" means a person who has been diagnosed by a physician as having a
debilitating medical condition.

14.  "Registry
identification card" means a document issued by the department that
identifies a person as a registered qualifying patient, registered designated
caregiver or a registered nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary agent.

15.  "Usable
marijuana" means the dried flowers of the marijuana plant, and any mixture
or preparation thereof, but does not include the seeds, stalks and roots of the
plant and does not include the weight of any non‑marijuana ingredients
combined with marijuana and prepared for consumption as food or drink.

16.  "Verification
system" means a secure, password-protected, web‑based system
established and maintained by the department that is available to law
enforcement personnel and nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary agents on a twenty-four hour twenty‑four‑hour basis for verification of registry
identification cards.

17.  "Visiting
qualifying patient" means a person:

(a)  Who
is not a resident of Arizona or who has been a resident of Arizona less than
thirty days.

(b)  Who
has been diagnosed with a debilitating medical condition by a person who is
licensed with authority to prescribe drugs to humans in the state of the
person's residence or, in the case of a person who has been a resident of
Arizona less than thirty days, the state of the person's former residence.

18.  "Written
certification" means a document dated and signed by a physician, stating
that in the physician's professional opinion the patient is likely to receive
therapeutic or palliative benefit from the medical use of marijuana to treat or
alleviate the patient's debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated
with the debilitating medical condition.  The physician must: 

(a)  Specify
the qualifying patient's debilitating medical condition in the written
certification.

(b)  Sign
and date the written certification only in the course of a physician-patient
relationship after the physician has completed a full assessment of the
qualifying patient's medical history. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Requirements for
enactment; three-fourths vote

Pursuant to
article IV, part 1, section 1, Constitution of Arizona, section 36-2801,
Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended by this act, is effective only on the
affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of the members of each house of the
legislature.

