

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 15-491, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE15-491.  Elections
on school property; exceptions

A.  The
governing board of a school district may, and on petition of fifteen percent of
the school electors as shown by the poll list at the last preceding annual
school election shall, call an election for the following purposes:

1.  To
locate or change the location of school buildings.

2.  To
purchase or sell school sites or buildings or sell school sites pursuant to
section 15‑342 or to build school buildings, but the authorization by
vote of the school district shall not necessarily specify the site to be
purchased.

3.  To
decide whether the bonds of the school district shall be issued and sold for
the purpose of raising money for purchasing or leasing school lots, for
building or renovating school buildings, for supplying school buildings with
furniture, equipment and technology, for improving school grounds, for
purchasing pupil transportation vehicles or for liquidating any indebtedness
already incurred for such purposes.  Bonds issued for furniture, equipment and
technology, other than fixtures, shall mature no later than the July 1 that
follows the fifth year after the bonds were issued.  A school district shall
not issue class B bonds until the school district has obligated in contract the
entire proceeds of any class A bonds issued by the school district.  The total
amount of class A and class B bonds issued by a school district shall not
exceed the debt limitations prescribed in article IX, sections 8 and 8.1,
Constitution of Arizona.

4.  To
lease for ten or more years, as lessor or as lessee, school buildings or
grounds   Approval by a majority of the school district electors
voting authorizes the governing board to negotiate for and enter into a
lease.  The ballot shall list the school buildings or grounds for
which a lease is sought.  If the governing board does not enter into
a lease of ten or more years of the school buildings or grounds listed on the
ballot within ten years of the date of the election and the board continues to
seek such a lease, the governing board shall call a special election to
reauthorize the board to negotiate for and to enter into a lease of ten or more
years.

5.  To
change the list of capital projects or the purposes authorized by prior voter
approval to issue bonds. 

6.  To
extend from six to ten years the time period to issue class B bonds authorized
in 2009 or earlier.  Elections pursuant to this paragraph may not be held later
than the sixth November after the election approving the issuance of the bonds.

B.  No
petition shall be required for the holding of the first election to be held in
a joint common school district for any of the purposes specified in subsection
A of this section.  The notice of election required by section 15‑492
shall be published in each of the counties that comprise the joint common
school district.  The certification of election results required by
section 15‑493 shall be made to the board of supervisors of the
jurisdictional county.

C.  When
the election is called to determine whether or not bonds of the school district
shall be issued and sold for the purposes enumerated in the call for the
election, the question shall be submitted to the vote of the qualified electors
of the school district as defined in section 15‑401 and subject to
section 15‑402.

D.  The
governing board shall order the election to be held in the manner prescribed in
title 35, chapter 3, article 3.  If a petition for an election has been filed
with the governing board as provided in subsection A of this section, the board
shall act on the petition within sixty days by ordering the election to be held
as provided in this subsection.  If a school district bond election is
scheduled for the same date a school district will hold an override election,
the governing body shall deliver a copy of the notice of election and ballot to
the county school superintendent who shall include the notice of election and
ballot with the information report and ballot prepared for the override
election.  Mailing of the information required for both the override
and bond elections shall constitute compliance with the notice provisions of
this section.

E.  The
elections to be held pursuant to this section shall only be held on dates
prescribed by section 16‑204, except that elections held pursuant to this
section to decide whether class B bonds shall be issued, or any other
obligation incurred that will require the assessment of secondary property
taxes, shall only be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday of
November.

F.  Subsection
A, paragraph 2 of this section does not apply to the sale of school property if
the market value of the school property is less than fifty thousand dollars.

G.  Bond
counsel fees, financial advisory fees, printing costs and paying agent and
registrar fees for bonds issued pursuant to an election under this section
shall be paid from either the amount authorized by the qualified electors of
the school district or current operating funds.  Bond election expenses shall
be paid from current operating funds only.

H.  For
any election conducted to decide whether class B bonds will be issued pursuant
to this section:

1.  Except
as provided in paragraph 2 of this subsection, the ballot shall include the
following statement:

The
capital improvements that are proposed to be funded through this bond issuance
are to exceed the state standards and are in addition to monies provided by the
state.

___________
school district is proposing to issue class B general obligation bonds totaling
$__________ to fund capital improvements over and above those funded by the
state.  Under the students first capital funding system, _________ school
district is entitled to state monies for new construction and renovation of
school buildings in accordance with state law.

2.  For
a school district that is a joint technical education district, the ballot
shall include the following statement:

___________,
a joint technical education district, is proposing to issue class B general
obligation bonds totaling $___________ to fund capital improvements at a campus
owned or operated and maintained by the joint technical education district.

3.  The
ballot shall contain the words "bond approval, yes" and "bond
approval, no", and the voter shall signify the voter's desired choice. 

4.  The
ballot shall also contain the phrase "the issuance of these bonds will
result in an annual levy of property taxes sufficient to pay the debt on the
bonds".

5.  At
least eighty‑five days before the election, the school district shall
submit proposed ballot language to the director of the Arizona legislative
council.  The director of the Arizona legislative council shall
review the proposed ballot language to determine whether the proposed ballot
language complies with this section.  If the director of the Arizona
legislative council determines that the proposed ballot language does not comply
with this section, the director, within ten calendar days of the receipt of the
proposed ballot language, shall notify the school district of the director's
objections and the school district shall resubmit revised ballot language to
the director for approval.

6.  No
later than thirty-five days before a class B bond election conducted pursuant
to this section, the school district shall mail a publicity pamphlet to each
household that contains a qualified elector in the school district.  The
publicity pamphlet shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:

(a)  An
executive summary of the school district's most recent capital plan submitted
to the school facilities board.

(b)  A
complete list of each proposed capital improvement that will be funded with the
proceeds of the bonds and a description of the proposed cost of each
improvement, including a separate aggregation of capital improvements for
administrative purposes as defined by the school facilities board.

(c)  The
tax rate associated with each of the proposed capital improvements and the
estimated cost of each capital improvement for the owner of a single family
home that is valued at one hundred thousand dollars.

I.  For
any election conducted to decide whether impact aid revenue bonds shall be
issued pursuant to this section:

1.  The
ballot shall include the following statement:

The
capital improvements that are proposed to be funded through this bond issuance
are to exceed the state standards and are in addition to monies provided by the
state.

__________
school district is proposing to issue impact aid revenue bonds totaling
$__________ to fund capital improvements over and above those funded by the
state.  Under the students first capital funding system, _________ school
district is entitled to state monies for new construction and renovation of
school buildings in accordance with state law.

2.  The
ballot shall contain the words "bond approval, yes" and "bond
approval, no", and the voter shall signify the voter's desired choice.

3.  At least eighty‑five days before the election, the
school district shall submit proposed ballot language
to the director of the legislative council.  The director of the legislative
council shall review the proposed ballot language to determine whether the
proposed ballot language complies with this section.  If the director
of the legislative council determines that the proposed ballot language does
not comply with this section, the director, within ten calendar days of the
receipt of the proposed ballot language, shall notify the school district of
the director's objections and the school district shall resubmit revised ballot
language to the director for approval.

4.  No
later than thirty‑five days before an impact aid revenue bond election
conducted pursuant to this section, the school district shall mail a publicity
pamphlet to each household that contains a qualified elector in the school
district.  The publicity pamphlet shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information:

(a)  The
date of the election.

(b)  The
voter's polling place and the times it is open.

(c)  An
executive summary of the school district's most recent capital plan submitted
to the school facilities board.

(d)  A
complete list of each proposed capital improvement that will be funded with the
proceeds of the bonds and a description of the proposed cost of each
improvement, including a separate aggregation of capital improvements for
administrative purposes as defined by the school facilities board.

(e)  A
statement that impact aid revenue bonds will be fully funded by aid that the
school district receives from the federal government and do not require a levy
of taxes in the district.

(f)  A
statement that if the bonds are approved, the first priority for the impact aid
will be to pay the debt service for the bonds and that other uses of the monies
are prohibited until the debt service obligation is met.

(g)  A
statement that if the impact aid revenue bonds are approved, the school
district shall not issue or sell class B bonds while the district has existing
indebtedness from impact aid revenue bonds, except for bonds issued to refund
any bonds issued by the board.

J.  If
the voters approve the issuance of school district class B bonds or impact aid
revenue bonds, the school district shall not use the bond proceeds for any
purposes other than the proposed capital improvements listed in the publicity
pamphlet, except that up to ten percent of the bond proceeds may be used for
general capital expenses, including cost overruns of proposed capital improvements.  The
proposed capital improvements may be changed by a subsequent election as
provided by this section.

K.  Each
school district that issues bonds under this section is required to hold a
public meeting each year between September 1 and October 31, until the bond
proceeds are spent, at which an update of the progress of capital improvements
financed through bonding is discussed and at which the public is permitted an
opportunity to comment.  At a minimum, the update shall include a
comparison of the current status and the original projections on the
construction of capital improvements, the costs of capital improvements and the
costs of capital improvements in progress or completed since the prior meeting
and the future capital bonding plans of the school district.  The
school district shall include in the public meeting a discussion of the school
district's use of state capital aid and voter‑approved capital overrides
in funding capital improvements, if any.

L.  If
an election is held to change the purpose or list of capital projects
authorized by prior voter approval to issue bonds pursuant to subsection A,
paragraph 5 of this section, the following requirements apply:

1.  The
election may be held only on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November.


2.  No
later than thirty‑five days before the election, the school district
shall mail a publicity pamphlet to each household in the school district that
contains a qualified elector.  The publicity pamphlet shall contain, at a
minimum, the following information:

(a)  The
date of the election.

(b)  The
voter's polling place and the times it is open.

(c)  A
statement as to why the election was called. 

(d)  A
complete list of each proposed capital improvement that is in addition to the
initial capital improvements presented in the publicity pamphlet when the bonds
were approved and the proposed cost of each improvement, including a separate
aggregation of capital improvements for administrative purposes as defined by
the school facilities board.

(e)  A
complete list of each capital improvement that was presented in the publicity
pamphlet when the bonds were initially approved and that is proposed to be
eliminated or to have its cost reduced, and the proposed cost of each
improvement, including a separate aggregation of capital improvements for
administrative purposes as defined by the school facilities board.

(f)  Arguments
for and against the proposed change, if submitted, as provided by section 15‑481,
subsection B, paragraph 9.  The ballot arguments for the proposed
change shall be signed as the governing board of the school district without
listing any member's individual name for the arguments for the proposed change.

3.  The
ballot shall contain the words "change capital improvements, yes" and
"change capital improvements, no", and the voter shall signify the
voter's desired choice.

4.  If
the election is to add a purpose that was not on the initial ballot, the ballot
shall list the purpose that is proposed to be added.

M.  If
an election is held to extend the time to issue bonds pursuant to subsection A,
paragraph 6 of this section, the following requirements apply:

1.  The
election may be held only on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in
November. 

2.  No
later than thirty‑five days before the election, the school district
shall mail a publicity pamphlet to each household in the school district that
contains a qualified elector.  The publicity pamphlet shall contain,
at a minimum, the following information:

(a)  The
date of the election.

(b)  The
voter's polling place and the times it is open.

(c)  A
statement as to why the election was called. 

(d)  Arguments
for and against the proposed change, if submitted, as provided in section 15‑481,
subsection B, paragraph 9.  The ballot arguments for the proposed
change shall be signed as the governing board of the school district without
listing any member's individual name for the arguments for the proposed change.

3.  The
ballot shall contain the words "extend time to issue bonds, yes" and
"extend time to issue bonds, no", and the voter shall signify the
voter's desired choice.

N.  Notwithstanding
title 35, chapter 3, article 3, the publicity pamphlet shall contain at least
two arguments, if submitted, but no more than ten arguments for and two arguments,
if submitted, but no more than ten arguments against the proposed bond
issuance.  The arguments submitted for and against the bond issuance shall be
in a form prescribed by the county school superintendent, and each argument
shall not exceed two hundred words.  Arguments for the proposed bond issuance
shall be provided in writing and signed by the governing board.  The
ballot arguments for the proposed bond issuance shall be signed as the
governing board of the school district without listing any member's individual
name for the arguments for the proposed bond issuance.  If submitted,
additional arguments in favor of the proposed bond issuance shall be provided
in writing and signed by those in favor.  Arguments against the proposed bond issuance
shall be provided in writing and signed by those in opposition.  The names of
persons and entities submitting written arguments shall be included in the
publicity pamphlet.  The county school superintendent shall review
all factual statements contained in the written arguments and correct any
inaccurate statements of fact.  The superintendent shall not review
and correct any portion of the written arguments that are identified as
statements of the author's opinion.  The county school superintendent
shall make the written arguments available to the public as provided in title
39, chapter 1, article 2.  A deadline for submitting arguments to be included
in the publicity pamphlet shall be set by the county school superintendent. END_STATUTE

