

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 9-500.05, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE9-500.05.  Development
agreements; public safety; state preemption; prevailing wage contract;
prohibited agreements; definitions

A.  A
municipality, by resolution or ordinance, may enter into development agreements
relating to property in the municipality and to property located outside the
incorporated area of the municipality.  If the development agreement relates to
property located outside the incorporated area of the municipality, the
development agreement does not become operative unless annexation proceedings
to annex the property to the municipality are completed within the period of
time specified by the development agreement or any extension of such time.

B.  A
development agreement shall be consistent with the municipality's general plan
or specific plan, if any, as defined in section 9‑461, applicable to the
property on the date the development agreement is executed.

C.  A
development agreement may be amended, or cancelled in whole or in part, by
mutual consent of the parties to the development agreement or by their
successors in interest or assigns.

D.  No Not later than ten days after a
municipality enters into a development agreement, the municipality shall record
a copy of the agreement with the county recorder of the county in which the
property subject to the development agreement is located, and the recordation
constitutes notice of the development agreement to all persons.  The burdens of
the development agreement are binding on, and the benefits of the development
agreement inure to, the parties to the agreement and to all their successors in
interest and assigns.

E.  Section
32‑2181 does not apply to development agreements under this section.

F.  Notwithstanding
any other law, a municipality may provide by resolution or ordinance for public
safety purposes, and with the written consent of an owner of property that has
been granted a development agreement pursuant to this section, an owner of a
protected development right pursuant to chapter 11 of this title or the owner
of any other residential or commercial development subject to the supervision
of a municipality pursuant to this title, for the application and enforcement
of speed limits, vehicle weight restrictions or other safety measures on a
private road that is located in any development in the municipality and that is
open to and used by the public.  A municipality may require payment from the
property owner of the actual cost of signs for speed limits or other
restrictions applicable on the private road,  before their installation.

G.  Notwithstanding
section 19‑142, subsection B, a decision by the governing body involving
a development agreement may not be enacted as an emergency measure and that
decision is not effective for at least thirty days after final approval of the
development agreement.

H.  The
public interest in the rates of wages paid under development agreements
transcends local or municipal interests and is of statewide concern.

I.  Municipalities
may not, by regulation, ordinance or in any other manner, require development
agreements to contain a provision requiring the wages paid by the contractor or
any subcontractor to be not less than the prevailing rate of wages for work of
a similar nature in this state or in the political subdivision where the
project is located.

J.  A
municipality may not require in any development agreement that a contractor,
subcontractor, material supplier or carrier engaged in any project under a
development agreement do any of the following as a condition of or a factor in
bidding, negotiating, being awarded or performing work on a development agreement:


1.  Negotiate,
execute or otherwise become a party to any project labor agreement or other
agreement with employees, employees' representatives or any labor organization.

2.  Enter
into a neutrality agreement with any labor organization. 

3.  Participate
in or contribute to an apprenticeship program that is registered with the
United States department of labor. 

K.  Subsection
J of this section does not:

1.  Prohibit
private parties from entering into individual collective bargaining
relationships.

2.  Regulate
or interfere with activity protected by law, including the national labor
relations act.

H.  L.  In For the purposes of this section, unless the context otherwise
requires:

1.  "Development
agreement" means an agreement between a municipality and a community
facilities district pursuant to section 48‑709, a landowner or any other
person having an interest in real property that may specify or otherwise relate
to any of the following:

(a)  The
duration of the development agreement.

(b)  The
permitted uses of property subject to the development agreement.

(c)  The
density and intensity of uses and the maximum height and size of proposed
buildings within such property.

(d)  Provisions
for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes and provisions to
protect environmentally sensitive lands.

(e)  Provisions
for preservation and restoration of historic structures.

(f)  The
phasing or time of construction or development on property subject to the
development agreement.

(g)  Conditions,
terms, restrictions and requirements for public infrastructure and the
financing of public infrastructure and subsequent reimbursements over time.

(h)  Conditions,
terms, restrictions and requirements for annexation of property by the
municipality and the phasing or timing of annexation of property by the
municipality.

(i)  Conditions,
terms, restrictions and requirements of deannexation of property from one
municipality to another municipality and the phasing or timing of deannexation
of property from one municipality to another municipality.

(j)  Conditions,
terms, restrictions and requirements relating to the governing body's intent to
form a special taxing district pursuant to title 48.

(k)  Any
other matters relating to the development of the property.

2.  "Governing
body" means the body or board which by law is constituted as the
legislative body of the municipality.

3.  "Municipality"
means an incorporated city or town.

4.  "Neutrality
agreement" includes an agreement to remain neutral toward any labor
organization, release private employee information not required by federal
labor law, allow access to property beyond what is required by federal labor
law and recognize a labor organization without a secret ballot election
conducted pursuant to federal labor law.

5.  "Project
labor agreement" means any prehire, collective bargaining, model
construction or similar type of agreement entered into with one or more labor
organizations, employees or employee representatives that establishes the terms
and conditions of employment on a construction project. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 11-1101, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE11-1101.  Development
agreements; state preemption; prevailing wage contract; prohibited agreements;
definitions

A.  A
county, by resolution or ordinance, may enter into development agreements
relating to property located outside the incorporated area of a city or town.

B.  The
development agreement shall be between the county and a landowner or any other
person having an interest in real property and may specify or otherwise relate
to any of the following:

1.  The
duration of the agreement.

2.  The
permitted uses of property subject to the agreement.

3.  The
density and intensity of uses and the maximum height and size of proposed
buildings within the property.

4.  Provisions
for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes and provisions to
protect environmentally sensitive lands.

5.  Provisions
for preservation and restoration of historic structures.

6.  The
phasing or time of construction or development on the property.

7.  Conditions,
terms, restrictions, financing and requirements for public infrastructure and
subsequent reimbursements over time.

8.  Conditions,
terms, restrictions and requirements relating to the county's intent to form a
special taxing district pursuant to title 48.

9.  Conditions
of sewer services.

10.  Any
other matters relating to the development of the property.

C.  A
development agreement shall be consistent with the county comprehensive plan
adopted pursuant to chapter 6, article  1 of this title and applies to the
property on the date the development agreement is executed.

D.  A
development agreement may be amended, or cancelled in whole or in part, by
mutual consent of the parties to the development agreement or by their
successors in interest or assigns.

E.  Within
ten days after a development agreement is executed, the county shall record a
copy of the agreement with the county recorder, and the recordation constitutes
notice of the development agreement to all persons. The burdens of the
development agreement are binding on, and the benefits of the development
agreement inure to, the parties to the agreement and to all of their successors
in interest and assigns.

F.  Section
32‑2181, subsection I does not apply to development agreements under this
section.

G.  Notwithstanding
any other law, a county may provide by resolution or ordinance for public
safety purposes, and with the written consent of an owner of property that has
entered into a development agreement pursuant to this section, for the
application and enforcement of speed limits, vehicle weight restrictions or
other safety measures on a private road that is located in any development
outside the corporate boundaries of a city or town and that is open to and used
by the public.  The county may require payment from the property
owner of the actual cost of signs for speed limits or other restrictions
applicable on the private road before their installation.

H.  The
public interest in the rates of wages paid under development agreements
transcends local or county interests and is of statewide concern.

I.  Counties
may not, by regulation, ordinance or in any other manner, require development
agreements to contain a provision requiring the wages paid by the contractor or
any subcontractor to be not less than the prevailing rate of wages for work of
a similar nature in this state or in the political subdivision where the
project is located.

J.  A
county may not require in any development agreement that a contractor,
subcontractor, material supplier or carrier engaged in any project under a
development agreement do any of the following as a condition of or a factor in
bidding, negotiating, being awarded or performing work on a development
agreement: 

1.  Negotiate,
execute or otherwise become a party to any project labor agreement or other
agreement with employees, employees' representatives or any labor organization.

2.  Enter
into a neutrality agreement with any labor organization. 

3.  Participate
in or contribute to an apprenticeship program that is registered with the
United States department of labor. 

K.  Subsection
J of this section does not:

1.  Prohibit
private parties from entering into individual collective bargaining
relationships.

2.  Regulate
or interfere with activity protected by law, including the national labor
relations act.

L.  For
the purposes of this section:

1.  "Neutrality
agreement" includes an agreement to remain neutral toward any labor
organization, release private employee information not required by federal
labor law, allow access to property beyond what is required by federal labor law
and recognize a labor organization without a secret ballot election conducted
pursuant to federal labor law.

2.  "Project
labor agreement" means any prehire, collective bargaining, model
construction or similar type of agreement entered into with one or more labor
organizations, employees or employee representatives that establishes the terms
and conditions of employment on a construction project. END_STATUTE

