

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 32-3248, Arizona Revised
Statutes, as added by Laws 2018, first special session, chapter 1, section 29,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-3248.  Health
professionals; controlled substances; initial prescriptions; limits;
exceptions; definition

A.  A
health professional who is authorized under this title to prescribe controlled
substances shall limit the initial prescription for a patient for a schedule II
controlled substance that is an opioid to not more than a five‑day
supply, except that an initial prescription for a schedule II controlled
substance that is an opioid following a surgical procedure is limited to not
more than a fourteen‑day supply.

B.  Subsection
A of this section does not apply to initial prescriptions if the patient:

1.  Has
an active oncology diagnosis.

2.  Has
a traumatic injury, not including a surgical procedure.

3.  Is
receiving hospice care.

4.  Is
receiving end‑of‑life care.

5.  Is
receiving palliative care.

6.  Is
receiving skilled nursing facility care.

7.  Is
receiving treatment for burns.

8.  Is
receiving medication‑assisted treatment for a substance use disorder.

9.  Is
an infant who is being weaned off opioids at the time of hospital discharge.

C.  If
a health professional's prescribing authority under the relevant chapter of
this title for schedule II controlled substances is more restrictive than the
limit specified in subsection A of this section, the health professional's
prescribing authority under the relevant chapter of this title applies.

D.  An
initial prescription for a schedule II controlled substance that is an opioid
that is written for more than a five‑day supply is deemed to meet the
requirements of an exemption under this section when the initial prescription
is presented to the dispenser.  A pharmacist is not required to
verify with the prescriber whether the initial prescription complies with this
section.

D.  E.  For the purposes of
this section, "initial prescription" means a prescription for a
schedule II controlled substance that is an opioid that has not covered any
portion of the past sixty days before the date the pharmacy dispenses the
current prescription as evidenced by the controlled substances prescription
monitoring program's central database tracking system. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 32-3248.01, Arizona Revised
Statutes, as added by Laws 2018, first special session, chapter 1, section 29,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-3248.01.  Schedule
II controlled substances; dosage limit; exceptions; morphine; opioid
antagonist; definition

A.  A
health professional who is authorized under this title to prescribe controlled
substances may not issue a new prescription order for a schedule II controlled
substance that is an opioid that exceeds ninety morphine milligram equivalents
per day.

B.  The
limit prescribed by subsection A of this section does not apply to:

1.  A
continuation of a prior prescription order that was issued within the previous
sixty days.

2.  An
opioid with a maximum approved total daily dose in the labeling as approved by
the United States food and drug administration.

3.  A
patient who:

(a)  Has
an active oncology diagnosis.

(b)  Has
a traumatic injury, not including a surgical procedure.

(c)  Is
receiving hospice care.

(d)  Is
receiving end‑of‑life care.

(e)  Is
receiving palliative care.

(f)  Is
receiving skilled nursing facility care.

(g)  Is
receiving treatment for burns.

(h)  Is
receiving medication‑assisted treatment for a substance use disorder.

(i)  Is
hospitalized.

C.  If
a health professional believes that a patient requires more than ninety
morphine milligram equivalents per day and the patient is not exempt from the
limit pursuant to subsection B of this section, the health professional shall
first consult with a physician who is licensed pursuant to chapter 13 or 17 of
this title and who is board‑certified in pain.  The consultation may be
done by telephone or through telemedicine.  If the consulting
physician is not available to consult within forty‑eight hours after the
request, the health professional may prescribe the amount that the health
professional believes the patient requires and subsequently have the
consultation.  If the health professional is a physician who is licensed
pursuant to chapter 13 or 17 of this title and is board‑certified in
pain, the health professional may issue a prescription order for more than
ninety morphine milligram equivalents per day without a consultation under this
subsection.

D.  If
a patient is prescribed more than ninety morphine milligram equivalents per day
pursuant to subsection B or C of this section, the prescribing health
professional shall also prescribe for the patient naloxone hydrochloride or any
other opioid antagonist that is approved by the United States food and drug
administration for the treatment of opioid‑related overdoses.

E.  A
prescription order for a schedule II controlled substance that is an opioid
that is written for more than ninety morphine milligram equivalents per day is
deemed to meet the requirements of an exemption under this section when the
prescription order is presented to the dispenser.  A pharmacist is
not required to verify with the prescriber whether the prescription order
complies with this section.

E.  F.  For the purposes of
this section, "prescription order" has the same meaning prescribed in
section 32‑1901. END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Section 36‑2525, Arizona Revised
Statutes, as amended by Laws 2018, first special session, chapter 1, section
37, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE36-2525.  Prescription
orders; labels; packaging; definition

A.  In
addition to the requirements of section 32‑1968 pertaining to
prescription orders for prescription‑only drugs, the prescription order
for a controlled substance shall bear the name, address and federal
registration number of the prescriber.  A prescription order for a
schedule II controlled substance drug other than a hospital drug order for a hospital
inpatient shall contain only one drug order per prescription
blank.  If authorized verbally by the prescriber, the pharmacist may
make changes to correct errors or omissions made by the prescriber on the
following parts of a written or electronic schedule II controlled substance
prescription order:

1.  The
date issued.

2.  The
strength, dosage form or quantity of drug.

3.  The
directions for its use.

B.  The
pharmacist must document on the original prescription order the changes that
were made pursuant to the verbal authorization and record the time and date the
authorization was granted.

C.  A
person who is registered to dispense controlled substances under this chapter
must keep and maintain prescription orders for controlled substances as follows:

1.  Prescription
orders for controlled substances listed in schedules I and II must be
maintained in a separate prescription file for controlled substances listed in
schedules I and II only.

2.  Prescription
orders for controlled substances listed in schedules III, IV and V must be
maintained either in a separate prescription file for controlled substances
listed in schedules III, IV and V only or in a form that allows them to be readily
retrievable from the other prescription records of the
registrant.  For the purposes of this paragraph, "readily
retrievable" means that, when the prescription is initially filed, the
face of the prescription is stamped in red ink in the lower right corner with
the letter "C" in a font that is not less than one inch high and that
the prescription is filed in the usual consecutively numbered prescription file
for noncontrolled substance prescriptions.  The requirement to stamp the hard
copy prescription with a red "C" is waived if a registrant employs an
electronic data processing system or other electronic recordkeeping system for
prescriptions that permits identification by prescription number and retrieval
of original documents by the prescriber's name, patient's name, drug dispensed
and date filled.

D.  Except
in emergency situations in conformity with subsection E of this section, under
the conditions specified in subsections F and G of this section or when
dispensed directly by a medical practitioner to an ultimate user, a controlled
substance in schedule II shall not be dispensed without either the written
prescription order in ink or indelible pencil or typewritten and manually
signed by the medical practitioner or an electronic prescription order as prescribed
by federal law or regulation.  Beginning January 1, 2019, a schedule II
controlled substance that is an opioid may be dispensed in a county with a
population of one hundred fifty thousand persons or more only with an
electronic prescription order as prescribed by federal law or regulation. 
Beginning July 1, 2019, a schedule II controlled substance that is an opioid
may be dispensed in a county with a population of less than one hundred fifty
thousand persons only with an electronic prescription order as prescribed by
federal law or regulation.  A prescription order for a schedule II substance
shall not be dispensed more than ninety days after the date on which the
prescription order was issued.  NOTWITHSTANDING ANY
OTHER PROVISION OF THIS SECTION, a
limited service pharmacy as defined in
section 32‑1901 may sell and dispense a schedule II controlled substance prescribed by a medical practitioner who
is located in another county in this state or in another
state if the prescription was issued to the patient according to and in
compliance with the applicable laws of the state of the prescribing medical
practitioner and federal law.  A
prescription order for a schedule II controlled substance shall not be
refilled.

E.  In
emergency situations, emergency quantities of schedule II controlled substances
may be dispensed on an oral prescription order of a medical
practitioner.  Such an emergency prescription order shall be
immediately reduced to writing by the pharmacist and shall contain all the information
required for schedule II controlled substances except for the manual signing of
the order by the medical practitioner.  Within seven days after authorizing an
emergency oral prescription order, the prescribing medical practitioner shall
cause a written prescription order manually signed for the emergency quantity
prescribed to be delivered to the dispensing pharmacist or an electronic
prescription order to be transmitted to the dispensing
pharmacist.  In addition to conforming to other requirements for
prescription orders for schedule II controlled substances, the prescription
order shall indicate electronically or have written on its face
"authorization for emergency dispensing" and the date of the oral
order.  If the prescribing medical practitioner fails to deliver such
an emergency prescription order within seven days in conformance with board
rules, the pharmacist shall notify the board.  Failure of the pharmacist to
notify the board voids the authority conferred by this subsection to dispense
without a prescription order of a medical practitioner that is electronic or
that is written and manually signed.

F.  The
following may be transmitted to a pharmacy by fax by a patient's medical
practitioner or the medical practitioner's agent:

1.  A
prescription order written for a schedule II controlled substance to be
compounded for the direct administration to a patient by parenteral,
intravenous, intramuscular, subcutaneous or intraspinal infusion.

2.  A
prescription order written for any schedule II controlled substance for a
resident of a long-term care facility.

3.  A
prescription order written for a schedule II controlled substance for a patient
enrolled in a hospice care program that is certified or paid for by medicare
under title XVIII or a hospice program that is licensed by this state.  The
medical practitioner or the medical practitioner's agent must note on the
prescription that the patient is a hospice patient.

G.  A
fax transmitted pursuant to subsection F of this section is the original
written prescription order for purposes of this section and must be maintained
as required by subsection C of this section.

H.  Except
when dispensed directly by a medical practitioner to an ultimate user, a
controlled substance included in schedule III or IV that requires a
prescription order as determined under state or federal laws shall not be
dispensed without a written or oral prescription order of a medical
practitioner
or an electronic prescription order as prescribed by federal law
or regulation.  The prescription order shall not be filled or
refilled more than six months after the date on which the prescription order
was issued.  A prescription order authorized to be refilled shall not be
refilled more than five times.  Additional quantities may only be authorized by
the prescribing medical practitioner through issuance of a new prescription
order that shall be treated by the pharmacist as a new and separate
prescription order.

I.  Except
when dispensed directly by a medical practitioner to an ultimate user, a controlled
substance that is included in schedule V and that requires a prescription order
as determined under state or federal laws shall not be dispensed without a
written or oral prescription order of a medical practitioner.  The
prescription order may be refilled as authorized by the prescribing medical
practitioner but shall not be filled or refilled more than one year after the
date of issuance.

J.  A
controlled substance that is listed in schedule III, IV or V and that does not
require a prescription order as determined under state or federal laws may be
dispensed at retail by a pharmacist, a pharmacy intern or a graduate intern
under the pharmacist's supervision without a prescription order to a purchaser
who is at least eighteen years of age if all of the following are true:

1.  It
is for a legitimate medical purpose.

2.  Not
more than two hundred forty cubic centimeters (eight ounces) of any such
controlled substance containing opium, nor more than one hundred twenty cubic
centimeters (four ounces) of any other such controlled substance, nor more than
forty‑eight dosage units of any such controlled substance containing
opium, nor more than twenty‑four dosage units of any other controlled
substance may be dispensed at retail to the same purchaser in any given forty‑eight-hour
period.

3.  No
more than one hundred dosage units of any single active ingredient ephedrine
preparation may be sold, offered for sale, bartered or given away to any one
person in any one thirty‑day period.

4.  The
pharmacist, pharmacy intern or graduate intern requires every purchaser of a
controlled substance under this subsection who is not known to that person to
furnish suitable identification, including proof of age if appropriate.

5.  A
bound record book for dispensing controlled substances under this subsection is
maintained by the pharmacist and contains the name and address of the
purchaser, the name and quantity of the controlled substance purchased, the
date of each purchase and the name or initials of the pharmacist, pharmacy
intern or graduate intern who dispensed the substance to the purchaser.  The
book shall be maintained in conformity with the recordkeeping requirements of
section 36‑2523.

K.  In
the absence of a law requiring a prescription for a schedule V controlled substance,
the board, by rules, may require, or remove the requirement of, a prescription
order for a schedule V controlled substance.

L.  The
label on a container of a controlled substance that is directly dispensed by a
medical practitioner or pharmacist and that is not for the immediate
administration to the ultimate user, such as a bed patient in a hospital, shall
bear the name and address of the dispensing medical practitioner or pharmacist,
the serial number, the date of dispensing, the name of the prescriber, the name
of the patient or, if an animal, the name of the owner of the animal and the
species of the animal, the directions for use and cautionary statements, if
any, contained in the prescription order or required by law.  If the controlled
substance is included in schedule II, III or IV, the label shall bear a
transfer warning to the effect:  "Caution:  federal law
prohibits the transfer of this drug to any person other than the patient for
whom it was prescribed".  The container of a schedule II controlled
substance that is an opioid that is directly dispensed by a pharmacist and that
is not for the immediate administration to the ultimate user shall have a red
cap and a warning label prescribed by the board about potential addiction.  The board or the executive director, if delegated by the board, may
waive the red cap requirement if implementing the requirement is not feasible
because of the specific dosage form or packaging type.

M.  Controlled
substances in schedules II, III, IV and V may be dispensed as electronically
transmitted prescriptions if the prescribing medical practitioner is all of the
following:

1.  Properly
registered by the United States drug enforcement administration.

2.  Licensed
in good standing in the United States jurisdiction in which the medical
practitioner practices.

3.  Authorized
to issue such prescriptions in the jurisdiction in which the medical
practitioner is licensed.

N.  Notwithstanding
any other provision of this section, beginning January 1, 2019, each
prescription order that is issued by a medical practitioner in a county with a
population of one hundred fifty thousand persons or more for a schedule II
controlled substance that is an opioid shall be transmitted electronically to
the dispensing pharmacy.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section,
beginning July 1, 2019, each prescription order that is issued by a medical
practitioner in a county with a population of less than one hundred fifty
thousand persons for a schedule II controlled substance that is an opioid shall
be transmitted electronically to the dispensing pharmacy.

O.  The
requirement in subsections D and N of this section for an electronic
prescription order does not apply to a prescription order for a schedule II
controlled substance that is an opioid that is issued for medication-assisted
treatment for a substance use disorder.

P.  The
board, by rule, may provide additional requirements for prescribing and
dispensing controlled substances. 

Q.  The
board shall establish a process to grant a waiver for the requirement in
subsections D and N of this section for electronic prescription orders to a
medical practitioner who lacks adequate access to broadband or faces other
hardships that prevent the medical practitioner from implementing electronic
prescription orders.  A pharmacist is not required to
verify with a medical practitioner or the board whether the medical
practitioner has received a waiver pursuant to this subsection.

R.  For
the purposes of this section, "medication‑assisted treatment"
has the same meaning prescribed in section 32‑3201.01. END_STATUTE

Sec. 4.  Retroactivity

This act
applies retroactively to from and after April 25, 2018.

