

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Title 35, chapter 1, article 5, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 35-181, to read:

START_STATUTE35-181.  Reporting
and accounting for federal financial assistance; definitions

A.  On
or before October 31 of each year, each designated state agency shall prepare a
report that does all of the following:

1.  States
the aggregate dollar amount of federal receipts that the agency received in the
preceding fiscal year.

2.  States
the aggregate dollar amount of any federal monies appropriated by the
legislature to the agency for the preceding fiscal year.

3.  Calculates
the percentage of the agency's total budget for the preceding fiscal year that
constitutes federal monies included under paragraphs 1 and 2 of this
subsection.

4.  Develops
a plan or plans for operating the agency if there is a reduction of:

(a)  Five
percent or more of the federal monies included under paragraphs 1 and 2 of this
subsection.

(b)  Twenty-five
percent or more of the federal monies included under paragraphs 1 and 2 of this
subsection.

B.  Each
designated state agency shall submit a copy of the report prescribed in
subsection A of this section to the department of administration on or before
November 1 of each year.

C.  On
or before November 30 of each year, the department of administration shall
prepare a report for the preceding fiscal year that does all of the following:

1.  Compiles
and summarizes the reports the department receives pursuant to subsection B of
this section.

2.  Compares
the aggregate dollar amount of federal monies reported by each agency under
subsection a, paragraphs 1 and 2 of this section with the agency's total
budget.

3.  Lists
the agencies that failed to submit a report as required by subsection B of this
section.

D.  On
or before December 1 of each year, the department of administration shall
transmit copies of the report prescribed in subsection C of this section to the
chairpersons of the Senate and House of representatives committees on
appropriations.  Each chairperson shall place the report on the agenda of the
next respective committee meeting for review and
consideration.  Based on the review of the report, the committee may
recommend that future appropriations of state monies to a designated state
agency be reduced, eliminated or otherwise adjusted.

E.  For the purposes of
this section:

1.  "Designated
state agency" means any budget unit of state government except the
judicial branch, the legislative branch and any office or other entity within
or under the judicial branch and the legislative branch.

2.  "Federal
receipts" means federal financial assistance, as defined in 31 United
States Code section 7501, that is reported as part of a single audit. END_STATUTE

