

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 49-104, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE49-104.  Powers
and duties of the department and director

A.  The
department shall:

1.  Formulate
policies, plans and programs to implement this title to protect the
environment.

2.  Stimulate
and encourage all local, state, regional and federal governmental agencies and
all private persons and enterprises that have similar and related objectives
and purposes, cooperate with those agencies, persons and enterprises and
correlate department plans, programs and operations with those of the agencies,
persons and enterprises.

3.  Conduct
research on its own initiative or at the request of the governor, the
legislature or state or local agencies pertaining to any department objectives.

4.  Provide
information and advice on request of any local, state or federal agencies and
private persons and business enterprises on matters within the scope of the
department.

5.  Consult
with and make recommendations to the governor and the legislature on all
matters concerning department objectives.

6.  Promote
and coordinate the management of air resources to ensure their protection,
enhancement and balanced utilization consistent with the environmental policy
of this state.

7.  Promote
and coordinate the protection and enhancement of the quality of water resources
consistent with the environmental policy of this state.

8.  Encourage
industrial, commercial, residential and community development that maximizes
environmental benefits and minimizes the effects of less desirable
environmental conditions.

9.  Ensure
the preservation and enhancement of natural beauty and man‑made scenic
qualities.

10.  Provide
for the prevention and abatement of all water and air pollution including that
related to particulates, gases, dust, vapors, noise, radiation, odor, nutrients
and heated liquids in accordance with article 3 of this chapter and chapters 2
and 3 of this title.

11.  Promote
and recommend methods for the recovery, recycling and reuse or, if recycling is
not possible, the disposal of solid wastes consistent with sound health, scenic
and environmental quality policies.  Beginning in 2014,
The department shall report annually on its revenues and expenditures relating
to the solid and hazardous waste programs overseen or administered by the
department.

12.  Prevent
pollution through the regulation of the storage, handling and transportation of
solids, liquids and gases that may cause or contribute to pollution.

13.  Promote
the restoration and reclamation of degraded or despoiled areas and natural
resources.

14.  Assist
the department of health services in recruiting and training state, local and
district health department personnel.

15.  14.  Participate in the
state civil defense program and develop the necessary organization and
facilities to meet wartime or other disasters.

16.  15.  Cooperate with the
Arizona‑Mexico commission in the governor's office and with researchers
at universities in this state to collect data and conduct projects in the
United States and Mexico on issues that are within the scope of the
department's duties and that relate to quality of life, trade and economic
development in this state in a manner that will help the Arizona‑Mexico
commission to assess and enhance the economic competitiveness of this state and
of the Arizona‑Mexico region.

17.  16.  Unless specifically
authorized by the legislature, ensure that state laws, rules, standards,
permits, variances and orders are adopted and construed to be consistent with
and no more stringent than the corresponding federal law that addresses the
same subject matter.  This paragraph shall not be construed to
does not adversely affect standards adopted by an Indian
tribe under federal law.

18.  17.  Provide administrative
and staff support for the oil and gas conservation commission.

B.  The
department, through the director, shall:

1.  Contract
for the services of outside advisers, consultants and aides reasonably
necessary or desirable to enable the department to adequately perform its
duties.

2.  Contract
and incur obligations reasonably necessary or desirable within the general
scope of department activities and operations to enable the department to
adequately perform its duties.

3.  Utilize
any medium of communication, publication and exhibition when disseminating
information, advertising and publicity in any field of its purposes, objectives
or duties.

4.  Adopt
procedural rules that are necessary to implement the authority granted under
this title, but that are not inconsistent with other provisions of this title.

5.  Contract
with other agencies, including laboratories, in furthering any department
program.

6.  Use
monies, facilities or services to provide matching contributions under federal
or other programs that further the objectives and programs of the department.

7.  Accept
gifts, grants, matching monies or direct payments from public or private
agencies or private persons and enterprises for department services and
publications and to conduct programs that are consistent with the general
purposes and objectives of this chapter. Monies received pursuant to this
paragraph shall be deposited in the department fund corresponding to the
service, publication or program provided.

8.  Provide
for the examination of any premises if the director has reasonable cause to
believe that a violation of any environmental law or rule exists or is being
committed on the premises.  The director shall give the owner or operator the
opportunity for its representative to accompany the director on an examination
of those premises.  Within forty‑five days after the date of
the examination, the department shall provide to the owner or operator a copy
of any report produced as a result of any examination of the premises.

9.  Supervise
sanitary engineering facilities and projects in this state, authority for which
is vested in the department, and own or lease land on which sanitary
engineering facilities are located, and operate the facilities, if the director
determines that owning, leasing or operating is necessary for the public
health, safety or welfare.

10.  Adopt
and enforce rules relating to approving design documents for constructing,
improving and operating sanitary engineering and other facilities for disposing
of solid, liquid or gaseous deleterious matter.

11.  Define
and prescribe reasonably necessary rules regarding the water supply, sewage
disposal and garbage collection and disposal for subdivisions.  The rules
shall:

(a)  Provide
for minimum sanitary facilities to be installed in the subdivision and may
require that water systems plan for future needs and be of adequate size and
capacity to deliver specified minimum quantities of drinking water and to treat
all sewage.

(b)  Provide
that the design documents showing or describing the water supply, sewage
disposal and garbage collection facilities be submitted with a fee to the
department for review and that no lots in any subdivision be offered for sale
before compliance with the standards and rules has been demonstrated by
approval of the design documents by the department.

12.  Prescribe
reasonably necessary measures to prevent pollution of water used in public or
semipublic swimming pools and bathing places and to prevent deleterious
conditions at such those places.  The
rules shall prescribe minimum standards for the design of and for sanitary
conditions at any public or semipublic swimming pool or bathing place and
provide for abatement as public nuisances of premises and facilities that do
not comply with the minimum standards.  The rules shall be developed
in cooperation with the director of the department of health services and shall
be consistent with the rules adopted by the director of the department of
health services pursuant to section 36‑136, subsection I, paragraph 10.

13.  Prescribe
reasonable rules regarding sewage collection, treatment, disposal and
reclamation systems to prevent the transmission of sewage borne or insect borne
diseases.  The rules shall:

(a)  Prescribe
minimum standards for the design of sewage collection systems and treatment,
disposal and reclamation systems and for operating the systems.

(b)  Provide
for inspecting the premises, systems and installations and for abating as a
public nuisance any collection system, process, treatment plant, disposal
system or reclamation system that does not comply with the minimum standards.

(c)  Require
that design documents for all sewage collection systems, sewage collection
system extensions, treatment plants, processes, devices, equipment, disposal
systems, on‑site wastewater treatment facilities and reclamation systems
be submitted with a fee for review to the department and may require that the
design documents anticipate and provide for future sewage treatment needs.

(d)  Require
that construction, reconstruction, installation or initiation of any sewage
collection system, sewage collection system extension, treatment plant,
process, device, equipment, disposal system, on‑site wastewater treatment
facility or reclamation system conform with applicable requirements.

14.  Prescribe
reasonably necessary rules regarding excreta storage, handling, treatment,
transportation and disposal.  The rules may:

(a)  Prescribe
minimum standards for human excreta storage, handling, treatment,
transportation and disposal and shall provide for inspection of premises,
processes and vehicles and for abating as public nuisances any premises,
processes or vehicles that do not comply with the minimum standards.

(b)  Provide
that vehicles transporting human excreta from privies, septic tanks, cesspools
and other treatment processes shall be licensed by the department subject to
compliance with the rules.  The department may require payment of a
fee as a condition of licensure.  The department may establish by rule a fee as
a condition of licensure, including a maximum fee.  As part of the
rulemaking process, there must be public notice and comment and a review of the
rule by the joint legislative budget committee.  After
September 30, 2013, The department shall not increase that fee by rule
without specific statutory authority for the increase.  The fees shall be
deposited, pursuant to sections 35‑146 and 35‑147, in the solid
waste fee fund established by section 49‑881.

15.  Perform
the responsibilities of implementing and maintaining a data automation
management system to support the reporting requirements of title III of the
superfund amendments and reauthorization act of 1986 (P.L. 99‑499) and
article 2 of this chapter.

16.  Approve
remediation levels pursuant to article 4 of this chapter.

17.  Establish
or revise fees by rule pursuant to the authority granted under title 44,
chapter 9, article 8 and chapters 4 and 5 of this title for the department to
adequately perform its duties.  All fees shall be fairly assessed and impose
the least burden and cost to the parties subject to the fees.  In
establishing or revising fees, the department shall base the fees on:

(a)  The
direct and indirect costs of the department's relevant duties, including
employee salaries and benefits, professional and outside services, equipment,
in-state travel and other necessary operational expenses directly related to
issuing licenses as defined in title 41, chapter 6 and enforcing the
requirements of the applicable regulatory program.

(b)  The
availability of other funds for the duties performed.

(c)  The
impact of the fees on the parties subject to the fees.

(d)  The
fees charged for similar duties performed by the department, other agencies and
the private sector.

18.  Appoint
a person with a background in oil and gas conservation to act on behalf of the
oil and gas conservation commission and administer and enforce the applicable
provisions of title 27, chapter 4 relating to the oil and gas conservation
commission.

C.  The
department may:

1.  Charge
fees to cover the costs of all permits and inspections it performs to ensure
compliance with rules adopted under section 49‑203, except that state
agencies are exempt from paying the fees.  Monies collected pursuant
to this subsection shall be deposited, pursuant to sections 35‑146 and 35‑147,
in the water quality fee fund established by section 49‑210. 

2.  Contract
with private consultants for the purposes of assisting the department in
reviewing applications for licenses, permits or other authorizations to
determine whether an applicant meets the criteria for issuance of the license,
permit or other authorization.  If the department contracts with a
consultant under this paragraph, an applicant may request that the department
expedite the application review by requesting that the department use the services
of the consultant and by agreeing to pay the department the costs of the
consultant's services.  Notwithstanding any other law, monies paid by
applicants for expedited reviews pursuant to this paragraph are appropriated to
the department for use in paying consultants for services.

D.  The
director may:

1.  If
the director has reasonable cause to believe that a violation of any
environmental law or rule exists or is being committed, inspect any person or
property in transit through this state and any vehicle in which the person or
property is being transported and detain or disinfect the person, property or
vehicle as reasonably necessary to protect the environment if a violation
exists.

2.  Authorize
in writing any qualified officer or employee in the department to perform any
act that the director is authorized or required to do by law. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 49-218.01, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE49-218.01.  Brownfields
cleanup revolving loan fund program; eligibility

A.  The
director shall may implement the
Brownfields cleanup revolving loan fund program pursuant to the requirements of
the CERCLA Brownfields cleanup revolving loan fund program.

B.  The
director may:

1.  Enter
into financial
assistance agreements, as deemed appropriate, with eligible persons
for the performance of eligible activities at eligible sites. 

2.  Apply
for, accept and administer grants and other financial assistance from the
federal government and from other public and private sources for the
Brownfields cleanup revolving loan fund program.

3.  Enter
into agreements to administer the program.

4.  Enter
into agreements with the water infrastructure finance authority pursuant to
section 49‑1203 to perform any of the functions of the fund manager
pursuant to the CERCLA Brownfields cleanup revolving loan fund program.

5.  Assess
fees to administer the Brownfields
cleanup revolving loan fund program consistent with any
cooperative agreement with the environmental protection agency.

C.  Financial assistance monies shall be used to perform removal actions
that meet the requirements of the applicable program or oversight
mechanism, the CERCLA Brownfields cleanup revolving loan fund
program and this article.  To the extent possible, the department shall
eliminate duplicative requirements among the programs.

D.  The
following are not eligible for the Brownfields
cleanup revolving loan fund program:

1.  A
site listed or proposed for listing on the national priorities list.

2.  A site that is subject to state or federal unilateral
administrative orders, a court order, administrative orders on consent or a
judicial consent decree issued to or entered into by parties under CERCLA or
this title.

3.  A
site that is subject to the jurisdiction, custody or control of the United
States government.

E.  The director, through the attorney general, may take actions
necessary to enforce the loan contract and achieve repayment of loans provided
under this article. END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Section 49-225, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE49-225.  Water
quality monitoring

A.  The
director of environmental quality shall, with the advice
and cooperation of the Arizona department of agriculture and the director of
water resources when appropriate, shall
conduct ongoing monitoring of the waters of the state including the state's
navigable waters and aquifers to detect the presence of new and existing
pollutants, determine compliance with applicable water quality standards,
determine the effectiveness of best management practices, agricultural best
management practices and best available demonstrated control technologies,
evaluate the effects of pollutants on public health or the environment and
determine water quality trends.

B.  The
director shall maintain a statewide data base database of groundwater and soils sampled for
pollutants.  All agencies shall submit to the director, in a timely
manner, the results of any groundwater or soils sampling for pollutants and the
results of any groundwater or soils sampling that detect any pollutants.

C.  The
director shall establish minimum requirements and schedules for groundwater and
soils sampling that will ensure precise and accurate results.  The
requirements shall be distributed to all agencies that conduct
sampling.  All sampling conducted shall meet the minimum requirements
established pursuant to this subsection. END_STATUTE

Sec. 4.  Section 49-241, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE49-241.  Permit
required to discharge

A.  Unless
otherwise provided by this article, any person who discharges or who owns or
operates a facility that discharges shall obtain an aquifer protection permit
from the director.

B.  Unless
exempted under section 49‑250, or unless the director determines that the
facility will be designed, constructed and operated so that there will be no
migration of pollutants directly to the aquifer or to the vadose zone, the
following are considered to be discharging facilities and shall be operated
pursuant to either an individual permit or a general permit, including
agricultural general permits, under this article:

1.  Surface
impoundments, including holding, storage settling, treatment or disposal pits,
ponds and lagoons.

2.  Solid
waste disposal facilities except for mining overburden and wall rock that has
not been and will not be subject to mine leaching operations.

3.  Injection
wells.

4.  Land
treatment facilities.

5.  Facilities
that add a pollutant to a salt dome formation, salt bed formation, dry well or
underground cave or mine.

6.  Mine
tailings piles and ponds.

7.  Mine
leaching operations.

8.  Underground
water storage facilities.

9.  Sewage
treatment facilities, including on‑site wastewater treatment facilities.

10.  Wetlands
designed and constructed to treat municipal and domestic wastewater for
underground storage.

C.  The
director shall provide public notice and an opportunity for public comment on
any request for a determination from the director under subsection B of this
section that there will be no migration of pollutants from a
facility.  A public hearing may be held at the discretion of the
director if sufficient public comment warrants a hearing.  The director may
inspect and may require reasonable conditions and appropriate monitoring and
reporting requirements for a facility managing pollutants that are determined
not to migrate under subsection B of this section.  The director may identify
types of facilities, available technologies and technical criteria for
facilities that will qualify for such a
determination.  The director's determination may be revoked on
evidence that pollutants have migrated from the facility.  The director may
impose a review fee for a determination under subsection B of this
section.  Any issuance, denial or revocation of a determination may
be appealed pursuant to section 49‑323.

D.  The
director shall publish a list of the names and locations of existing facilities
that are required to obtain an aquifer protection permit. The director may
revise the list as needed.  Any revised list shall contain deadlines for the
submittal of applications for aquifer protection permits, based on the degree
of risk to the public health and welfare and the environment and based on a
work plan of the director designed to process all applications for an aquifer
protection permit no later than January 1, 2004 for nonmining facilities and no
later than January 1, 2006 for mining facilities.

E.  D.  The director shall
annually make the fee schedule for aquifer protection permit applications
available to the public on request and on the department's website, and a list
of the names and locations of the facilities that have filed applications for
aquifer protection permits, with a description of the status of each
application, shall be is available
to the public on request.

F.  E.  The director shall
prescribe the procedures for aquifer protection permit applications and fee
collection under this section.  The director shall deposit, pursuant
to sections 35‑146 and 35‑147, all monies collected under this
section in the water quality fee fund established by section 49‑210 and
may authorize expenditures from the fund, subject to legislative appropriation,
to pay reasonable and necessary costs of processing and issuing permits and
administering the registration program. END_STATUTE

Sec. 5.  Section 49-546, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE49-546.  Fleet
emissions inspection stations; certificates of inspection; dealer's inventory;
investigations; revocation or suspension of permit

A.  Any
registered owner or lessee of a fleet of at least twenty‑five vehicles
may apply to the director for a permit to establish a fleet emissions
inspection station.  The director shall not issue any fleet emissions
inspection station permit until the director has found that the applicant:

1.  Maintains
an established place of business for the repair and maintenance of the
applicant's fleet of vehicles.

2.  Has
obtained approved machinery, tools and equipment to adequately conduct the
required emissions inspections.

3.  Employs
properly trained and licensed personnel with which to perform the necessary
labor.

4.  Agrees
to provide data as may be prescribed by the director.

B.  Any
operator of a fleet emissions inspection station under a valid permit shall, upon filing an application in the manner and form
prescribed by the director and paying the prescribed fee, shall receive
a sufficient number of certificates of inspection for each vehicle in the
applicant's fleet.   A certificate of inspection shall not be issued
to any fleet vehicle until it has been inspected and found to comply with
applicable regulations.  A certificate of inspection issued to a
fleet vehicle is transferable to an auctioneer who intends to
sell the vehicle and who is licensed as a used motor vehicle dealer as prescribed by the director.  The certificate of
inspection is valid for a period of not more than one hundred eighty days after
the transfer unless the vehicle is reregistered with a new owner, in which case
the vehicle shall be inspected in accordance with this article before the
reregistration.

C.  A
holder of a fleet emissions inspection station permit shall not inspect or
certificate any vehicle for which the permittee is not the registered owner or
lessee, unless authorized by the director.

D.  Vehicles
that are owned by a licensed vehicle dealer and that are held for resale as a
part of the dealer's business inventory shall be are deemed a part of the dealer's vehicle fleet for the
purposes of this section.

E.  Every
vehicle subject to this section and registered in this state shall be inspected
in accordance with this article or the rules adopted pursuant to this
article.  A vehicle that is subject to this section may not be
registered or reregistered until the vehicle has passed inspection or been
issued a waiver pursuant to section 49‑542.

F.  The
director shall investigate the operation of each fleet emissions inspection
station as the conditions and circumstances of the operation may
indicate.  The director may require the holder of any fleet permit to
submit such documentation required concerning the
operation of the inspection station.  The director may suspend or
revoke and require the surrender and forfeiture of any fleet emissions
inspection station permit and certificates of inspection of the permittee if
the director finds that the station is not operated in accordance with this
article and the lawful rules adopted by the director or the holder of the
permit has failed or refused to submit records or documentation required.

G.  For
the purposes of section 49‑542.03, this section applies to a fleet motor
vehicle dealer who meets both of the following conditions:

1.  The
principal place of business is within fifty miles of the outer boundary of area
A.

2.  The
dealer certifies to the department that customers who reside in area A are the
primary source of the dealer's business. END_STATUTE

