

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 15-1821.01, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE15-1821.01.  Dual
enrollment information

On a
determination by a community college district governing board that it is in the
best interest of the citizens of a district, the district governing board may
authorize district community colleges to offer college courses that may be
counted toward both high school and college graduation requirements at the high
school during the school day,
subject to the following:

1.  The
community college district governing board and the governing board of the
school district or organization of which the high school is a part shall enter
into an agreement or contract.  These intergovernmental agreements or contracts
shall be based on a uniform format that has been cooperatively developed by the
community college districts in this state.  Each of these agreements or
contracts shall clearly specify the following: 

(a)  The
financial provisions of the agreement or contract and the format for the
billing of all services under the agreement or contract, including the amount
that the community college received in full‑time student equivalent
funding pursuant to section 15‑1466.01, the portion of the funding that
is distributed to the school district governing board or charter school and any
amount that is subsequently returned to the community college district by the
school district governing board or charter school.

(b)  Student
tuition and financial aid policies, including if whether scholarships or grants are
awarded to students in dual enrollment courses from the community college.

(c)  The
accountability provisions for each party to the agreement or contract.

(d)  The
responsibilities and services required of each party to the agreement or
contract.

(e)  The
type of instruction that will be provided under the agreement or contract,
including the titles of the courses to be offered.

(f)  The
quality of the instruction that will be provided under the agreement or
contract.

2.  Students
shall be admitted to the community college under the policies adopted by each
district, subject to the following:

(a)  All
students enrolled for college credit shall be high school juniors or
seniors.  All students in the course, including those not electing to
enroll for college credit, shall satisfy the prerequisites for the course as
published in the college catalog and shall comply with college policies
regarding student placement in courses.

(b)  A
community college may waive the class status requirements specified in
subdivision (a) of this paragraph for up to twenty‑five per cent percent of the students enrolled by a
college in courses, provided that the community college has an established written criteria for
waiving the requirements for each course.  These criteria shall
include a demonstration, by an examination of the specific purposes and
requirements of the course, that freshman and sophomore students who meet course
prerequisites are prepared to benefit from the college level college‑level course.  All exceptions
and the justification for the exceptions shall be reported annually to the
joint legislative budget committee on or before October December 1.

3.  The
courses shall be previously evaluated and approved through the curriculum
approval process of the district, shall be at a higher level than taught by the
high school and shall be transferable to a university under the jurisdiction of
the Arizona board of regents or be applicable to an established community
college occupational degree or certificate program.  Physical education courses
shall are not be available for dual enrollment
purposes.

4.  College approved College‑approved textbooks, syllabuses, course outlines
and grading standards that are applicable to the courses if taught at the
community college shall apply to these courses and to all students in the
courses offered pursuant to this section.  The chief executive
officer of each community college shall establish an advisory committee of full‑time
faculty who teach in the disciplines offered at the community college to assist
in course selection and implementation in the high schools and to review and
report at least annually to the chief executive officer whether the course
goals and standards are understood, the course guidelines are followed and the
same standards of expectation and assessment are applied to these courses as
though they were being offered at the community college.  The advisory committee
of full-time faculty shall meet at least three times each academic year.

5.  Each
faculty member shall meet the requirements established by the governing board
pursuant to section 15‑1444.  The chief executive officer of
each community college district shall establish an advisory committee of full‑time
faculty who teach in the disciplines offered at the community college district
to assist in the selection, orientation, ongoing professional development and
evaluation of faculty teaching college courses in conjunction with the high
schools.  The advisory committee of full-time faculty shall meet at
least two times each academic year.

6.  A
school district shall ensure that a pupil is a full‑time student as
defined in section 15‑901 and is enrolled in and attending a full‑time
instructional program at a school in the school district before that pupil is
allowed to enroll in a college course pursuant to this section, except that
high school seniors who satisfy high school graduation requirements with less
than a full‑time instructional program shall be are exempt from this paragraph. END_STATUTE

