

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Title 16, chapter 1, article 4, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 16-154, to read:

START_STATUTE16-154.  Address
validation

On
receipt of a completed voter registration form that contains a registrant's
driver license or nonoperating identification license number, the secretary of
state or a county recorder, as applicable, shall provide to the department of
transportation a summary of the registrant's relevant information for the
purposes of validating the registrant's residence address.  The summary shall
include the registrant's full name, address, date of birth and driver license
or nonoperating identification license number.END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Title 28, chapter 2, article 5, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 28-450, to read:

START_STATUTE28-450.  Address
inconsistency; voter registration form; notice; violation; civil penalty;
suspension

A.  The
department shall determine that a person's residence address on the
department's records is the same as the person's residence address on the
summary that the department receives from the secretary of state's office as
prescribed by section 16‑154.  If the department determines that the
addresses are not the same, the department shall notify the person of the
inconsistencY in writing.  The notice shall contain:

1.  A
provision that within thirty days after the date on the notice if the person
provides written evidence to the department that the person has registered to
vote using an address that is the same as the address in the department's
records, the person is not in violation of section 28‑448 and is not
subject to a civil penalty.

2.  A
provision that if the person does not provide evidence as described in
paragraph 1 of this subsection, the person:

(a)  Is in violation of
section 28‑448.

(b)  Is subject to a civil
penalty of ten percent of the maximum civil penalty prescribed by section 28‑1598.

(c)  Must update the
person's address with the department within ten days or be subject to a
suspension of the person's driver or nonoperating identification license.

3.  The
language of sections 28‑448 and 28‑1598. 

B.  Within
thirty days after the date on the notice, the person shall submit written
evidence to the department that the person is registered to vote using an
address that is the same as the address in the department's records.  If the
person fails to submit this evidence, the person is all of the following:

1.  In
violation of section 28‑448.

2.  Subject
to a civil penalty of ten percent of the maximum civil penalty prescribed by
section 28‑1598.

3.  Subject
to a license suspension pursuant to section 28‑3324. END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Title 28, chapter 8, article 6, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 28-3324, to read:

START_STATUTE28-3324.  License
record; address; suspension

If
within thirty days after the date on the notice prescribed by section 28‑450
a person fails to provide written evidence that the person has registered to
vote using an address that is the same as the address on the department's
record and the person fails to update the person's address with the department
within ten days, the department shall suspend the person's driver or
nonoperating identification license until the person provides evidence that the
voting record address and the department address are the same. END_STATUTE

