

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 15-183, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE15-183.  Charter
schools; application; requirements; immunity; exemptions; renewal of
application; reprisal; fee; funds; annual reports

A.  An
applicant seeking to establish a charter school shall submit a written application
to a proposed sponsor as prescribed in subsection C of this
section.  The application, application process and application time
frames shall be posted on the sponsor's website and shall include the
following, as specified in the application adopted by the sponsor:

1.  A
detailed educational plan.

2.  A
detailed business plan.

3.  A
detailed operational plan.

4.  Any
other materials required by the sponsor.

B.  The
sponsor of a charter school may contract with a public body, private person or
private organization for the purpose of establishing a charter school pursuant
to this article.

C.  The
sponsor of a charter school may be either the state board of education, the
state board for charter schools, a university under the jurisdiction of the Arizona
board of regents, a community college district or a group of community college
districts, subject to the following requirements:

1.  An
applicant may not submit an application for sponsorship to any person or entity
other than those prescribed in this subsection.

2.  The
applicant may submit the application to the state board of education or the
state board for charter schools.  Notwithstanding any other law,
neither the state board for charter schools nor the state board of education
shall grant a charter to a school district governing board for a new charter
school or for the conversion of an existing district public school to a charter
school.  The state board of education or the state board for charter schools
may approve the application if the application meets the requirements of this
article and may approve the charter if the proposed sponsor determines, within
its sole discretion, that the applicant is sufficiently qualified to operate a
charter school and that the applicant is applying to operate as a separate
charter holder by considering factors such as whether:

(a)  The
schools have separate governing bodies, governing body membership, staff,
facilities and student population. 

(b)  Daily
operations are carried out by different administrators.

(c)  The
applicant intends to have an affiliation agreement for the purpose of providing
enrollment preferences.

(d)  The
applicant's charter management organization has multiple charter holders
serving varied grade configurations on one physical site or nearby sites
serving one community.

(e)  It
is reconstituting an existing school site population at the same or new site.

(f)  It
is reconstituting an existing grade configuration from a prior charter holder
with at least one grade remaining on the original site with the other grade or
grades moving to a new site.  The
state board of education or the state board for charter schools may approve any
charter schools transferring charters.  If the state board of
education or the state board for charter schools rejects the preliminary
application, the state board of education or the state board for charter
schools shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for the rejection
and of suggestions for improving the application.  An applicant may
submit a revised application for reconsideration by the state board of
education or the state board for charter schools.  The applicant may request,
and the state board of education or the state board for charter schools may
provide, technical assistance to improve the application.

3.  The
applicant may submit the application to a university under the jurisdiction of
the Arizona board of regents, a community college district or a group of
community college districts.  A university, a community college
district or a group of community college districts shall not grant a charter to
a school district governing board for a new charter school or for the
conversion of an existing district public school to a charter school.  A
university, a community college district or a group of community college
districts may approve the application if it meets the requirements of this
article and if the proposed sponsor determines, in its sole discretion, that
the applicant is sufficiently qualified to operate a charter school.

4.  Each
applicant seeking to establish a charter school shall submit a full set of
fingerprints to the approving agency for the purpose of obtaining a state and
federal criminal records check pursuant to section 41‑1750 and Public Law
92‑544.  If an applicant will have direct contact with
students, the applicant shall possess a valid fingerprint clearance card that
is issued pursuant to title 41, chapter 12, article 3.1.  The
department of public safety may exchange this fingerprint data with the federal
bureau of investigation.  The criminal records check shall be
completed before the issuance of a charter.

5.  All
persons engaged in instructional work directly as a classroom, laboratory or
other teacher or indirectly as a supervisory teacher, speech therapist or principal
shall have a valid fingerprint clearance card that is issued pursuant to title
41, chapter 12, article 3.1, unless the person is a volunteer or guest speaker
who is accompanied in the classroom by a person with a valid fingerprint
clearance card.  A charter school shall not employ a teacher whose certificate
has been surrendered or revoked, unless the teacher's certificate has been
subsequently reinstated by the state board of education.  All other
personnel shall be fingerprint checked pursuant to section 15‑512, or the
charter school may require those personnel to obtain a fingerprint clearance
card issued pursuant to title 41, chapter 12, article 3.1.  Before
employment, the charter school shall make documented, good faith efforts to
contact previous employers of a person to obtain information and
recommendations that may be relevant to a person's fitness for employment as
prescribed in section 15‑512, subsection F.  The charter school
shall notify the department of public safety if the charter school or sponsor
receives credible evidence that a person who possesses a valid fingerprint
clearance card is arrested for or is charged with an offense listed in section
41‑1758.03, subsection B.  A person who is employed at a
charter school that has met the requirements of this paragraph is not required
to meet any additional requirements that are established by the department of
education or that may be established by rule by the state board of
education.  The state board of education may not adopt rules that
exceed the requirements for persons qualified to teach in charter schools
prescribed in title I of the every student succeeds act (P.L. 114-95) or the
individuals with disabilities education improvement act of 2004
(P.L. 108-446).  Charter schools may hire personnel who have not
yet received a fingerprint clearance card if proof is provided of the
submission of an application to the department of public safety for a
fingerprint clearance card and if the charter school that is seeking to hire
the applicant does all of the following:

(a)  Documents
in the applicant's file the necessity for hiring and placement of the applicant
before receiving a fingerprint clearance card.

(b)  Ensures
that the department of public safety completes a statewide criminal records
check on the applicant.  A statewide criminal records check shall be completed
by the department of public safety every one hundred twenty days until the date
that the fingerprint check is completed or the fingerprint clearance card is
issued or denied.

(c)  Obtains
references from the applicant's current employer and the two most recent
previous employers except for applicants who have been employed for at least
five years by the applicant's most recent employer.

(d)  Provides
general supervision of the applicant until the date that the fingerprint card
is obtained.

(e)  Completes
a search of criminal records in all local jurisdictions outside of this state
in which the applicant has lived in the previous five years.

(f)  Verifies
the fingerprint status of the applicant with the department of public safety.

6.  A
charter school that complies with the fingerprinting requirements of this
section shall be deemed to have complied with section 15‑512 and is
entitled to the same rights and protections provided to school districts by
section 15‑512.

7.  If
a charter school operator is not already subject to a public meeting or hearing
by the municipality in which the charter school is located, the operator of a
charter school shall conduct a public meeting at least thirty days before the
charter school operator opens a site or sites for the charter
school.  The charter school operator shall post notices of the public
meeting in at least three different locations that are within three hundred
feet of the proposed charter school site.

8.  A
person who is employed by a charter school or who is an applicant for
employment with a charter school, who is arrested for or charged with a
nonappealable offense listed in section 41‑1758.03, subsection B and who
does not immediately report the arrest or charge to the person's supervisor or
potential employer is guilty of unprofessional conduct and the person shall be
immediately dismissed from employment with the charter school or immediately
excluded from potential employment with the charter school.

9.  A
person who is employed by a charter school and who is convicted of any
nonappealable offense listed in section 41‑1758.03, subsection B or is
convicted of any nonappealable offense that amounts to unprofessional conduct
under section 15‑550 shall immediately do all of the following:

(a)  Surrender
any certificates issued by the department of education.

(b)  Notify
the person's employer or potential employer of the conviction.

(c)  Notify
the department of public safety of the conviction.

(d)  Surrender
the person's fingerprint clearance card.

D.  An
entity that is authorized to sponsor charter schools pursuant to this article
has no legal authority over or responsibility for a charter school sponsored by
a different entity.  This subsection does not apply to the state board of
education's duty to exercise general supervision over the public school system
pursuant to section 15‑203, subsection A, paragraph 1.

E.  The
charter of a charter school shall do all of the following:

1.  Ensure
compliance with federal, state and local rules, regulations and statutes
relating to health, safety, civil rights and insurance.  The
department of education shall publish a list of relevant rules, regulations and
statutes to notify charter schools of their responsibilities under this
paragraph.

2.  Ensure
that it is nonsectarian in its programs, admission policies and employment
practices and all other operations.

3.  Ensure
that it provides a comprehensive program of instruction for at least a kindergarten
program or any grade between grades one and twelve, except that a school may
offer this curriculum with an emphasis on a specific learning philosophy or
style or certain subject areas such as mathematics, science, fine arts,
performance arts or foreign language.

4.  Ensure
that it designs a method to measure pupil progress toward the pupil outcomes
adopted by the state board of education pursuant to section 15‑741.01,
including participation in the statewide assessment and the nationally standardized
norm‑referenced achievement test as designated by the state board and the
completion and distribution of an annual report card as prescribed in chapter
7, article 3 of this title.

5.  Ensure
that, except as provided in this article and in its charter, it is exempt from
all statutes and rules relating to schools, governing boards and school
districts.

6.  Ensure
that, except as provided in this article, it is subject to the same financial
and electronic data submission requirements as a school district, including the
uniform system of financial records as prescribed in chapter 2, article 4 of
this title, procurement rules as prescribed in section 15‑213 and audit
requirements.  The auditor general shall conduct a comprehensive review and
revision of the uniform system of financial records to ensure that the
provisions of the uniform system of financial records that relate to charter
schools are in accordance with commonly accepted accounting principles used by
private business.  A school's
charter may include exceptions to the requirements of this paragraph that are
necessary as determined by the university, the community college district, the
group of community college districts, the state board of education or the state
board for charter schools. Each charter school
and education management organization or charter management organization that
enters into a management services contract with the charter school shall ensure
that an annual independent audit of financial statements is conducted and that
the results of that audit, including individual salaries paid by the charter
school to the EDUCATION management organization or charter management
organization and any management letter issued in connection with that audit, is
made available to the public. 
The department of education or the office of the auditor general may shall conduct financial, program or
compliance audits.

7.  Ensure
compliance with all federal and state laws relating to the education of
children with disabilities in the same manner as a school district.

8.  Ensure
that it provides for a governing body for the charter school that is
responsible for the operational
and policy
decisions of the charter school.  Notwithstanding section 1‑216, if there
is a vacancy or vacancies on the governing body, a majority of the remaining
members of the governing body constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business, unless that quorum is prohibited by the charter school's operating
agreement.  For
the purposes of this paragraph, "operational" includes all applicable
requirements for supervision that are prescribed for school district governing
boards pursuant to section 15‑341.

9.  Ensure
that it provides a minimum of one hundred eighty instructional days before June
30 of each fiscal year unless it is operating on an alternative calendar
approved by its sponsor.  The superintendent of public instruction
shall adjust the apportionment schedule accordingly to accommodate a charter
school utilizing an alternative calendar.

F.  A
charter school shall keep in the personnel file of all current employees who
provide instruction to pupils at the charter school information about the
employee's educational and teaching background and experience in a particular
academic content subject area.  A charter school shall inform parents
and guardians of the availability of the information and shall make the
information available for inspection on request of parents and guardians of
pupils enrolled at the charter school.  This subsection does not require any
charter school to release personally identifiable information in relation to
any teacher or employee, including the teacher's or employee's address, salary,
social security number or telephone number.

G.  The
charter of a charter school may be amended at the request of the governing body
of the charter school and on the approval of the sponsor.

H.  Charter
schools may contract, sue and be sued.

I.  The
charter is effective for fifteen years from the first day of the fiscal year as
specified in the charter, subject to the following:

1.  At
least eighteen months before the expiration of the charter, the sponsor shall
notify the charter school that the charter school may apply for renewal and
shall make the renewal application available to the charter
school.  A charter school that elects to apply for renewal shall file
a complete renewal application at least fifteen months before the expiration of
the charter.  A sponsor shall give written notice of its intent not
to renew the charter school's request for renewal to the charter school at
least twelve months before the expiration of the charter.  The
sponsor shall make data used in making renewal decisions available to the
school and the public and shall provide a public report summarizing the
evidence basis for each decision.  The sponsor may deny the request for renewal
if, in its judgment, the charter holder has failed to do any of the following:

(a)  Meet
or make sufficient progress toward the academic performance expectations set
forth in the performance framework.

(b)  Meet
the operational performance expectations set forth in the performance framework
or any improvement plans.

(c)  Complete
the obligations of the contract. 

(d)  Comply
with this article or any provision of law from which the charter school is not
exempt.

2.  A
charter operator may apply for early renewal.  At least nine months
before the charter school's intended renewal consideration, the operator of the
charter school shall submit a letter of intent to the sponsor to apply for
early renewal.  The sponsor shall review fiscal audits and academic
performance data for the charter school that are annually collected by the
sponsor, review the current contract between the sponsor and the charter school
and provide the qualifying charter school with a renewal application.  On
submission of a complete application, the sponsor shall give written notice of
its consideration of the renewal application.  The sponsor may deny the request
for early renewal if, in the sponsor's judgment, the charter holder has failed
to do any of the following:

(a)  Meet
or make sufficient progress toward the academic performance expectations set
forth in the performance framework.

(b)  Meet
the operational performance expectations set forth in the performance framework
or any improvement plans.

(c)  Complete
the obligations of the contract. 

(d)  Comply
with this article or any provision of law from which the charter school is not
exempt. 

3.  A
sponsor shall review a charter at five‑year intervals using a performance
framework adopted by the sponsor and may revoke a charter at any time if the
charter school breaches one or more provisions of its charter or if the sponsor
determines that the charter holder has failed to do any of the following:

(a)  Meet
or make sufficient progress toward the academic performance expectations set
forth in the performance framework.

(b)  Meet
the operational performance expectations set forth in the performance framework
or any improvement plans.

(c)  Comply
with this article or any provision of law from which the charter school is not
exempt.

4.  In
determining whether to renew or revoke a charter holder, the sponsor must
consider making sufficient progress toward the academic performance
expectations set forth in the sponsor's performance framework as one of the
most important factors.

5.  At
least sixty days before the effective date of the proposed revocation, the
sponsor shall give written notice to the operator of the charter school of its
intent to revoke the charter.  Notice of the sponsor's intent to
revoke the charter shall be delivered personally to the operator of the charter
school or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address of
the charter school.  The notice shall incorporate a statement of
reasons for the proposed revocation of the charter.  The sponsor
shall allow the charter school at least sixty days to correct the problems
associated with the reasons for the proposed revocation of the
charter.  The final determination of whether to revoke the charter
shall be made at a public hearing called for such purpose.

J.  The
charter may be renewed for successive periods of twenty years.

K.  A
charter school that is sponsored by the state board of education, the state
board for charter schools, a university, a community college district or a
group of community college districts may not be located on the property of a
school district unless the district governing board grants this authority.

L.  A
governing board or a school district employee who has control over personnel
actions shall not take unlawful reprisal against another employee of the school
district because the employee is directly or indirectly involved in an
application to establish a charter school.  A governing board or a
school district employee shall not take unlawful reprisal against an
educational program of the school or the school district because an application
to establish a charter school proposes the conversion of all or a portion of
the educational program to a charter school.  For the purposes of this subsection,
"unlawful reprisal" means an action that is taken by a governing
board or a school district employee as a direct result of a lawful application
to establish a charter school and that is adverse to another employee or an
education program and:

1.  With
respect to a school district employee, results in one or more of the following:

(a)  Disciplinary
or corrective action.

(b)  Detail,
transfer or reassignment.

(c)  Suspension,
demotion or dismissal.

(d)  An
unfavorable performance evaluation.

(e)  A
reduction in pay, benefits or awards.

(f)  Elimination
of the employee's position without a reduction in force by reason of lack of
monies or work.

(g)  Other
significant changes in duties or responsibilities that are inconsistent with
the employee's salary or employment classification.

2.  With
respect to an educational program, results in one or more of the following:

(a)  Suspension
or termination of the program.

(b)  Transfer
or reassignment of the program to a less favorable department.

(c)  Relocation
of the program to a less favorable site within the school or school district.

(d)  Significant
reduction or termination of funding for the program.

M.  Charter
schools shall secure insurance for liability and property loss.  The governing
body of a charter school that is sponsored by the state board of education or
the state board for charter schools may enter into an intergovernmental
agreement or otherwise contract to participate in an insurance program offered
by a risk retention pool established pursuant to section 11‑952.01 or 41‑621.01
or the charter school may secure its own insurance coverage.  The
pool may charge the requesting charter school reasonable fees for any services
it performs in connection with the insurance program.

N.  Charter
schools do not have the authority to acquire property by eminent domain.

O.  A
sponsor, including members, officers and employees of the sponsor, is immune
from personal liability for all acts done and actions taken in good faith
within the scope of its authority.

P.  Charter
school sponsors and this state are not liable for the debts or financial
obligations of a charter school or persons who operate charter schools.

Q.  The
sponsor of a charter school shall establish procedures to conduct
administrative hearings on determination by the sponsor that grounds exist to
revoke a charter.  Procedures for administrative hearings shall be similar to
procedures prescribed for adjudicative proceedings in title 41, chapter 6,
article 10.  Except as provided in section 41‑1092.08,
subsection H, final decisions of the state board of education and the
state board for charter schools from hearings conducted pursuant to this
subsection are subject to judicial review pursuant to title 12, chapter 7,
article 6.

R.  The
sponsoring entity of a charter school shall have oversight and administrative
responsibility for the charter schools that it sponsors.  In
implementing its oversight and administrative responsibilities, the sponsor
shall ground its actions in evidence of the charter holder's performance in
accordance with the performance framework adopted by the
sponsor.  The performance framework shall be publicly available,
shall be placed on the sponsoring entity's website and shall include:

1.  The
academic performance expectations of the charter school and the measurement of
sufficient progress toward the academic performance expectations. 

2.  The
operational expectations of the charter school, including adherence to all
applicable laws and obligations of the charter contract.

3.  Intervention
and improvement policies.

S.  Charter
schools may pledge, assign or encumber their assets to be used as collateral
for loans or extensions of credit.

T.  All
property accumulated by a charter school shall remain the property of the
charter school.

T.  If
a charter school closes, any asset of that charter school that was acquired in
whole or in part with public monies shall be returned to this state.  This
subsection does not apply if the proceeds from the sale of a closed charter
school are used to fund the capital costs for a new campus of that charter
school.

U.  Charter
schools may not locate a school on property that is less than one‑fourth
mile from agricultural land regulated pursuant to section 3‑365, except
that the owner of the agricultural land may agree to comply with the buffer
zone requirements of section 3‑365.  If the owner agrees in writing to
comply with the buffer zone requirements and records the agreement in the
office of the county recorder as a restrictive covenant running with the title
to the land, the charter school may locate a school within the affected buffer
zone.  The agreement may include any stipulations regarding the
charter school, including conditions for future expansion of the school and
changes in the operational status of the school that will result in a breach of
the agreement.

V.  A
transfer of a charter to another sponsor, a transfer of a charter school site
to another sponsor or a transfer of a charter school site to a different
charter shall be completed before the beginning of the fiscal year that the
transfer is scheduled to become effective.  An entity that sponsors charter
schools may accept a transferring school after the beginning of the fiscal year
if the transfer is approved by the superintendent of public
instruction.  The superintendent of public instruction shall have the
discretion to consider each transfer during the fiscal year on a case‑by‑case
basis.  A charter holder seeking to transfer sponsors shall comply
with the current charter terms regarding assignment of the
charter.  A charter holder transferring sponsors shall notify the
current sponsor that the transfer has been approved by the new sponsor.

W.  Notwithstanding
subsection V of this section, a charter holder on an improvement plan must
notify parents or guardians of registered students of the intent to transfer
the charter and the timing of the proposed transfer.  On the approved
transfer, the new sponsor shall enforce the improvement plan but may modify the
plan based on performance.

X.  Notwithstanding
subsection Y of this section, the state board for charter schools shall charge
a processing fee to any charter school that amends its contract to participate
in Arizona online instruction pursuant to section 15‑808.  The
charter Arizona online instruction processing fund is established consisting of
fees collected and administered by the state board for charter
schools.  The state board for charter schools shall use monies in the
fund only for the processing of contract amendments for charter schools
participating in Arizona online instruction.  Monies in the fund are
continuously appropriated.

Y.  The
sponsoring entity may not charge any fees to a charter school that it sponsors
unless the sponsor has provided services to the charter school and the fees
represent the full value of those services provided by the sponsor.  On
request, the value of the services provided by the sponsor to the charter
school shall be demonstrated to the department of education.

Z.  Charter
schools may enter into an intergovernmental agreement with a presiding judge of
the juvenile court to implement a law‑related education program as
defined in section 15‑154.  The presiding judge of the juvenile court may
assign juvenile probation officers to participate in a law‑related
education program in any charter school in the county.  The cost of
juvenile probation officers who participate in the program implemented pursuant
to this subsection shall be funded by the charter school.

AA.  The
sponsor of a charter school shall modify previously approved curriculum
requirements for a charter school that wishes to participate in the board
examination system prescribed in chapter 7, article 6 of this title.

BB.  If
a charter school decides not to participate in the board examination system
prescribed in chapter 7, article 6 of this title, pupils enrolled at that
charter school may earn a Grand Canyon diploma by obtaining a passing score on
the same board examinations.

CC.  Notwithstanding
subsection Y of this section, a sponsor of charter schools may charge a new
charter application processing fee to any applicant.  The application fee shall
fully cover the cost of application review and any needed technical
assistance.  Authorizers may approve policies that allow a portion of
the fee to be returned to the applicant whose charter is approved. 

DD.  A
charter school may choose to provide a preschool program for children with
disabilities pursuant to section 15‑771.

EE.  Pursuant
to the prescribed graduation requirements adopted by the state board of
education, the governing body of a charter school operating a high school may
approve a rigorous computer science course that would fulfill a mathematics
course required for graduation from high school.  The governing body may
approve a rigorous computer science course only if the rigorous computer
science course includes significant mathematics content and the governing body
determines the high school where the rigorous computer science course is
offered has sufficient capacity, infrastructure and qualified staff, including
competent teachers of computer science.

FF.  A
charter school may permit the use of school property, including school
buildings, grounds, buses and equipment, by any person, group or organization
for any lawful purpose, including a recreational, educational, political,
economic, artistic, moral, scientific, social, religious or other civic or
governmental purpose.  The charter school may charge a reasonable fee
for the use of the school property.

GG.  A
charter school and its employees, including the governing body, or chief
administrative officer, are immune from civil liability with respect to all
decisions made and actions taken to allow the use of school property, unless
the charter school or its employees are guilty of gross negligence or
intentional misconduct.  This subsection does not limit any other
immunity provisions that are prescribed by law. 

HH.  Sponsors
authorized pursuant to this section shall submit an annual report to the
auditor general on or before October 1.  The report shall include:

1.  The
current number of charters authorized and the number of schools operated by
authorized charter holders.

2.  The
academic and operational performance of the sponsor's charter portfolio as
measured by the sponsor's adopted performance framework.

3.  For
the prior year, the number of new charters approved, the number of charter
schools closed and the reason for the closure.

4.  The
sponsor's application, amendment, renewal and revocation processes, charter
contract template and current performance framework as required by this
section.

II.  The
auditor general shall prescribe the format for the annual report required by
subsection HH of this section and may require that the annual report be
submitted electronically.  The auditor general shall review the
submitted annual reports to ensure that the reports include the required items
in subsection HH of this section and shall make the annual reports available on
request.  If the auditor general finds significant noncompliance or
if a sponsor fails to submit the annual report required by subsection HH of
this section, on or before December 31 of each year the auditor general shall
report to the governor, the president of the senate, the speaker of the house of
representatives and the chairs of the senate and house education committees or
their successor committees, and the legislature shall consider revoking the
sponsor's authority to sponsor charter schools.END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 15-189.01, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE15-189.01.  Charter
schools; zoning; development fees

A.  Charter
schools shall be classified the same as public schools that are operated by a
school district for the purposes of zoning and the assessment of zoning fees,
site plan fees and development fees, including any required hearings or
applications.  Municipalities and counties shall allow a charter school to be established
and operate at a location or in a facility for which the zoning regulations of
the county or municipality cannot legally prohibit schools operated by school
districts, except that a county or municipality may adopt zoning regulations
that prohibit a charter school from operating on property that is less than an
acre in size and that is located within an existing single family residence
zoning district.

B.  Except
as provided in subsection D of this section, a charter school is subject to the
same level of oversight and the same rules, hearing requirements, application
requirements, ordinances, limitations and other requirements, if any, that
would be applied to and enforced against a school that is operated by a school
district.  A municipality or county shall not enforce, or attempt to enforce,
any ordinance, procedure or process against a charter school that cannot be
legally enforced against a school district.  Voluntary compliance of by a school district in with the zoning regulations of a municipality
or a county does not result in the application of those zoning regulations to a
charter school. 

C.  The
construction and development of the charter school facility shall be subject to
the building codes, including life and safety building codes, of the
municipality, county or state in which the charter school facility is located.

D.  Municipalities
and counties shall adopt procedures to ensure that hearings and administrative
reviews involving charter schools are scheduled and conducted on an expedited
basis and that charter schools receive a final determination from the
municipality or county within thirty days after the beginning of processes
requiring only an administrative review and within ninety days after the
beginning of processes requiring a public hearing and allowing an appeal to a
board of adjustment, city or town governing body or board of supervisors.

E.  Except
as provided in subsection F of this section, no political subdivision of this
state may enact or interpret any law, rule or ordinance in a manner that
conflicts with this section.

F.  Notwithstanding
subsections A and B of this section, a charter school shall not be established
or operated on commercial or residential property in an age restricted
community that is located in unorganized territory.

G.  A
charter school may authorize a third party to apply to a municipality or county
as the representative of that charter school for any application or action
prescribed in subsections A through D of this section.

H.  A
new charter school may not be established after the effective date of this
amendment to this section in a location that is within a three‑mile
radius of a school that is operated by a school district and that has received
a letter grade of A or B pursuant to section 15‑241. END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Section 15-189.02, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE15-189.02.  Charter
schools; public bidding requirements

A.  Except as otherwise provided in
section 15‑213, a
charter school's procurement is exempt from public bidding requirements if the
aggregate dollar amount of the procurement does not exceed the maximum amount
of the exemption authorized by title 41, chapter 23 or pursuant to rules
adopted by the director of the department of administration.  

B.  Notwithstanding
subsection A, the state board for charter schools may authorize an exemption
from public bidding requirements that exceeds the maximum exemption prescribed
in subsection A of this section for any charter school sponsored by the state
board for charter schools. END_STATUTE

Sec. 4.  Section 15-189.03, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE15-189.03.  Academic
credits; transfer; withdrawal; notification

A.  If
a pupil who was previously enrolled in a charter school or school district
enrolls in a charter school in this state, the charter school shall accept
credits earned by the pupil in courses or instructional programs at the charter
school or school district.  A charter school governing board may
adopt a policy concerning the application of transfer credits for the purpose
of determining whether a credit earned by a pupil who was previously enrolled
in a school district or charter school will be assigned as an elective or core
credit.

B.  A
pupil who transfers from a charter school or school district shall be provided
with a list that indicates which credits have been accepted as an elective
credit and which credits have been accepted as a core credit by the charter
school.  Within ten school days after receiving the list, a  the pupil may request to take an
examination in each particular course in which core credit has been
denied.  The charter school shall accept the credit as a core credit
for each particular course in which the pupil takes an examination and receives
a passing score on a test designed and evaluated by a teacher in the charter
school who teaches the subject matter on which the examination is based.

C.  If
a pupil withdraws or transfers from a charter school during the school year,
the charter school shall report the withdrawal or transfer to the department of
education within two weeks after the withdrawal or transfer.  The
department of education shall adjust the average daily membership of the
charter school to account for that pupil's withdrawal or transfer at the next
scheduled distribution of state aid to that charter school. END_STATUTE

Sec. 5.  Section 15-213, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE15-213.  Procurement
practices of school districts and charter schools; definitions

A.  The
state board of education shall adopt rules prescribing procurement practices
for all school districts in this state as follows:

1.  The
state board shall submit to the auditor general proposed rules consistent with
the procurement practices prescribed in title 41, chapter 23, modifying the
provisions for public notice of invitation for bids, requests for proposals and
requests for qualifications to allow a governing board to give public notice of
the invitation for bids, requests for proposals and requests for qualifications
by publication in the official newspaper of the county as defined prescribed in section 11‑255, modifying
the provisions relating to disposal of materials to comply with section 15‑342,
paragraph 18, providing for governing board delegation of procurement authority
and modifying as necessary other provisions that the state board determines are
not appropriate for school districts.  The rules shall include
provisions specifying that school districts are not required to engage in
competitive bidding in order to make the decision to participate in programs
pursuant to section 15‑382 and that a program authorized by section 15‑382
is not required to engage in competitive bidding for the services necessary to
administer the program or for purchase of insurance or
reinsurance.  The rules shall include provisions specifying that
school districts are not required to engage in competitive bidding in order to
place a pupil in a private school that provides special education services if
such placement is prescribed in the pupil's individualized education program
and the private school has been approved by the department of education
division of special education pursuant to section 15‑765, subsection
D.  This placement is not subject to rules adopted by the state board
of education before November 24, 2009 pursuant to this section.  The rules for
procurement of construction projects shall include provisions specifying that
surety bonds furnished as bid security and performance and payment bonds shall
be executed and furnished as required by title 34, chapter 2 or 6, as
applicable.  The rules shall specify the total cost of a procurement that is
subject to invitations for bids, requests for proposals and requests for
clarification, using the aggregate dollar amount limits for procurements
prescribed in section 41‑2535, except that any solicited quote
that exceeds fifty thousand dollars for the provision of materials, services or
construction for charter schools must be in writing.

2.  The
state board of education shall adopt rules for procurements involving
construction not exceeding one hundred fifty thousand dollars, which shall be
known as the simplified school construction procurement program.  At
a minimum, the rules for a simplified construction procurement program shall
require that:

(a)  A
list be maintained by each county school superintendent of persons who desire
to receive solicitations to bid on construction projects to which additions
shall be permitted throughout the year.

(b)  The
list of persons be available for public inspection.

(c)  A
performance bond and a payment bond as required by this section be provided for
contracts for construction by contractors.

(d)  All
bids for construction be opened at a public opening and the bids shall remain
confidential until the public opening.

(e)  All
persons desiring to submit bids be treated equitably and the information
related to each project be available to all eligible persons.

(f)  Competition
for construction projects under the simplified school construction procurement
program be encouraged to the maximum extent possible.  At a minimum, a school
district shall submit information on each project to all persons listed with
the county school superintendent by any school district within that county.

(g)  A
provision, covenant, clause or understanding in, collateral to or affecting a
construction contract that makes the contract subject to the laws of another
state or that requires any litigation, arbitration or other dispute resolution
proceeding arising from the contract to be conducted in another state is
against this state's public policy and is void and unenforceable.

3.  The
state board of education shall adopt rules for the procurement of goods and
information services by school districts and charter schools using electronic,
online bidding.  The rules adopted by the state board shall include the use of
reverse auctions and shall be consistent with the procurement practices
prescribed in title 41, chapter 23, article 13, modifying as necessary those
provisions and the rules adopted pursuant to that article that the state board
determines are not appropriate for school districts and charter schools.  Until
the rules are adopted, school districts and charter schools may procure goods
and information services pursuant to title 41, chapter 23, article 13 using the
rules adopted by the department of administration in implementing that article.

4.  The
auditor general shall review the proposed rules to determine whether the rules
are consistent with the procurement practices prescribed in title 41, chapter
23 and any modifications are required to adapt the procedures for school
districts.

5.  If
the auditor general approves the proposed rules, the auditor general shall
notify the state board in writing and the state board shall adopt such rules.

6.  If
the auditor general objects to the proposed rules, the auditor general shall
notify the state board of the objections in writing and the state board, in
adopting the rules, shall conform the proposed rules to meet the objections of
the auditor general or revise the proposed rules to which an objection has been
made and submit the revisions to the auditor general for approval.

B.  After
the bids submitted in response to an invitation for bids are opened and the
award is made or after the proposals or qualifications are submitted in
response to a request for proposals or a request for qualifications and the
award is made, the governing board shall make available for public inspection all
information, all bids, proposals and qualifications submitted and all findings
and other information considered in determining whose bid conforms to the
invitation for bids and will be the most advantageous with respect to price,
conformity to the specifications and other factors or whose proposal or
qualifications are to be selected for the award.  The invitation for
bids, request for proposals or request for qualifications shall include a
notice that all information and bids, proposals and qualifications submitted
will be made available for public inspection.  The rules adopted by the state
board shall prohibit the use in connection with procurement of specifications
in any way proprietary to one supplier unless the specification includes all of
the following:

1.  A
statement of the reasons why no other specification is practicable.

2.  A
description of the essential characteristics of the specified product.

3.  A
statement specifically permitting an acceptable alternative product to be
supplied.

C.  No
project or purchase may be divided or sequenced into separate projects or
purchases in order to avoid the limits prescribed by the state board under
subsection A of this section.

D.  A
contract for the procurement of construction or construction services shall
include a provision that provides for negotiations between the school district
and the contractor for the recovery of damages related to expenses incurred by
the contractor for a delay for which the school district is responsible, that
is unreasonable under the circumstances and that was not within the
contemplation of the parties to the contract.  This subsection shall not be
construed to void any provision in the contract that requires notice of delays,
provides for arbitration or any other procedure for settlement or provides for
liquidated damages.

E.  The
auditor general may conduct discretionary reviews, investigations and audits of
the financial and operational procurement activities of school districts, nonexempt charter schools and school purchasing
cooperatives.  The auditor general has final review and approval authority over
all school district, nonexempt charter school and school
purchasing cooperative audit contracts and any audit reports issued in
accordance with this section.

F.  In
addition to the requirements of sections 15‑914 and 15‑914.01,
school districts, nonexempt charter schools and school
purchasing cooperatives, in connection with any audit conducted by a certified
public accountant, shall contract for a systematic review of purchasing
practices using methodology consistent with sampling guidelines established by
the auditor general.  The auditor general shall consider cost when
establishing guidelines pursuant to this subsection and to the extent possible
shall attempt to minimize the cost of the review.  The purpose of the review is
to determine whether the school district, nonexempt charter school or school
purchasing cooperative is in compliance with the procurement laws and
applicable procurement rules of this state.  A copy of the review shall be
submitted on completion to the auditor general.  The auditor general
may conduct discretionary reviews of school districts, nonexempt charter schools and school
purchasing cooperatives not required to contract for independent audits.  An audit of a
charter school shall identify the source of any profit distribution that
exceeds net profits for that year.

G.  The
attorney general or county attorney has jurisdiction to enforce this section. 
The attorney general or county attorney may seek relief for any violation of
this section through an appropriate civil or criminal action in superior court,
including an action to enjoin a threatened or pending violation of this section
and including an action to enforce compliance with any request for documents
made by the auditor general pursuant to this section.

H.  The
department of education shall enact policies and procedures for the acceptance
and disposition of complaints from the public regarding school procurement
practices and shall forward all school procurement complaints to the attorney
general.  Notwithstanding rules adopted by the state board, school
districts shall not be required to prepare or submit an annual report on the
benefits associated with the use of construction‑manager‑at‑risk,
design‑build, qualified select bidders list and job‑order‑contracting
methods.

I.  The
state board of education shall adopt, and the auditor general shall review,
rules authorizing school districts to procure construction services by
construction‑manager‑at‑risk, design‑build, qualified
select bidders list and job‑order‑contracting methods of project
delivery.  The rules shall not require school districts to obtain bid
security for the construction‑manager‑at‑risk method of
project delivery.

J.  A
school district or charter school may evaluate United States general services
administration contracts for materials and services.  The governing board or
governing body may authorize purchases under a current contract for materials
or services without complying with the requirements of the procurement rules
adopted by the state board of education if the governing board or governing
body determines in writing that all of the following apply:

1.  The
price for materials or services is equal to or less than the contractor's
current federal supply contract price with the general services administration.

2.  The
contractor has indicated in writing that the contractor is willing to extend
the current federal supply contract pricing, terms and conditions to the school
district or charter school.

3.  The
purchase order adequately identifies the federal supply contract on which the
order is based.

4.  The
purchase contract is cost effective and is in the best interests of the school
district or charter school.

K.  Unless
otherwise provided by law, multiterm contracts for materials or services and
contracts for job-order-contracting construction services may be entered into
if the duration of the contract and the conditions of renewal or extension, if
any, are included in the invitation for bids or the request for proposals and
if monies are available for the first fiscal period at the time the contract is
executed.  The duration of contracts for materials or services and
contracts for job‑order‑contracting construction services shall be
limited to no more than five years unless the governing board determines in
writing before the procurement solicitation is issued that a contract of longer
duration would be advantageous to the school district.  Payment and performance
obligations for succeeding fiscal periods are subject to the availability and
appropriation of monies.

L.  Notwithstanding
the rules adopted by the state  board of  education, the maximum
dollar amount of an individual job order for job‑order‑contracting
construction services shall be one million dollars or a higher or lower amount
prescribed by the governing board in a policy adopted in a public meeting held
pursuant to title 38, chapter 3, article 3.1. Requirements shall not be
artificially divided or fragmented in order to constitute a job order that
satisfies the requirements of this subsection.  

M.  For
the purposes of this section:

1.  "Nonexempt
charter school" means a charter school that is not exempted from
procurement laws pursuant to section 15‑183, subsection E, paragraph 6.

2.  1.  "School purchasing
cooperative" means an entity engaged in cooperative purchasing as defined
in section 41‑2631.

3.  2.  "Total cost" means the
cost of all materials and services, including the cost of labor performed by
employees of the school district, for all construction as provided in
subsection A of this section. END_STATUTE

Sec. 6.  Section 15-914, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE15-914.  Financial
and compliance audits

A.  The
governing board of a school district that is required to comply with the single
audit act amendments of 1996 (P.L. 104‑156; 110 Stat. 1396; 31
United States Code sections 7501 through 7507) shall contract for at least
annual financial and compliance audits of financial transactions and accounts
subject to the single audit act amendments of 1996 and kept by or for the
school district.  The governing board of a school district that is
not required to comply with the single audit act and that has adopted an
expenditure budget of two million dollars or more for the maintenance and operation
fund pursuant to section 15‑905 shall contract for an annual financial
statement audit.  The governing board of a school district that is not required
to comply with the single audit act and that has adopted an expenditure budget
of less than two million dollars but more than seven hundred thousand dollars
for the maintenance and operation fund pursuant to section 15‑905 shall
contract for a biennial financial statement audit.  An independent
certified public accountant shall conduct the audit in accordance with
generally accepted governmental auditing standards.  To the extent
permitted by federal law, a school district that is required to participate in
an annual audit pursuant to this subsection may convert to a biennial audit
schedule if the previous annual audit did not contain any significant negative
findings.  If a biennial audit of a school district conducted
pursuant to this subsection contains any significant negative findings, the
school district shall convert back to an annual audit schedule.  If a
school district is required to convert back to an annual audit schedule
pursuant to this subsection because of significant negative findings, the
school district may subsequently convert to a biennial audit schedule if the
previous two annual audits did not contain any significant negative
findings.  For the purposes of this subsection, "significant
negative finding" means a finding that results in the issuance of a letter
of noncompliance from the auditor general.

B.  The
governing board of a charter school that is required to comply with the single
audit act amendments of 1996 shall contract for an annual financial and
compliance audit of financial transactions and accounts subject to the single
audit act amendments of 1996 and kept by or for the charter school.

C.  A
charter school that is not subject to the single audit act amendments of 1996
shall contract for at
least an
annual financial
statement comprehensive audit conducted in accordance with
generally accepted governmental auditing standards.  An independent
certified public accountant shall conduct the audit.

D.  For
all audits referred to in subsections A, B and C of this section, the
independent certified public accountant shall submit a uniform system of
financial records compliance questionnaire to the auditor general with the
applicable audit reports.  The independent certified public
accountant shall also send a paper copy or electronic copy of the applicable
audit reports to the county school superintendent of the county where the school
district is located.

E.  Contracts
for all financial and compliance audits and financial statement audits and the
completed audits shall be approved by the auditor general as provided in
section 41‑1279.21.  Contracts for all financial and compliance
audits and financial statement audits shall comply with the rules for
competitive sealed proposals as prescribed by the state board of education in
section 15‑213.

F.  If
the school district or charter school will incur costs of financial and
compliance audits for the budget year, the governing board of the school
district or the governing body of the charter school may increase its base
support level for the budget year by an amount equal to the amount expended for
the district's or charter school's financial and compliance audits in the year
before the current year, increased by the growth rate as prescribed by law,
subject to appropriation.  In determining the amount expended for the
district's or charter school's financial and compliance audits, the school
district or charter school shall include only the portion of the audit that
must be paid from monies other than federal monies.  The department
of education and the auditor general shall prescribe a method for determining
the increase in the base support level and shall include in the maintenance and
operation section of the budget format, as provided in section 15‑903, a
separate line for financial and compliance audits expenditures.

G.  Every
audit contract shall include a systematic review of average daily membership,
as defined in section 15‑901, using methodology that is consistent with
guidelines established by the auditor general.  The auditor general shall
consider cost when establishing guidelines pursuant to this subsection and, to
the extent possible, shall attempt to minimize the cost of the
review.  The purpose of the review is to determine whether the
average daily membership reported by the charter school or school district is
in compliance with the laws of this state and the uniform systems of financial
records for charter schools and school districts.

H.  In
addition to any other audit required or allowed by law, the auditor general
shall conduct a comprehensive annual audit of each charter school in this
state.

I.  Each
audit conducted for a charter school that includes a review of compliance with
the uniform system of financial records shall include examinations of classroom
spending, special education programs and the diversity of the charter school
pupils and staff.
END_STATUTE

Sec. 7.  Section 15-914.01, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE15-914.01.  Accounting
responsibility; definition

A.  School
districts and
charter schools may
apply to the state board of education to assume accounting responsibility.

B.  A
school district or
charter school applying
to the state board of education to assume accounting responsibility shall
develop and file with the department of education an accounting responsibility
plan and document in the plan:

1.  Administrative
and internal accounting controls designed to achieve compliance with the
uniform system of financial records and the objectives of this section,
including:

(a)  Procedures
for approving, preparing and signing vouchers and warrants.

(b)  Procedures
to ensure verification of administrators' and teachers' certification records
with the department of education for all classroom and administrative personnel
required to hold a certificate by the state board of education pursuant to
section 15‑203 before issuing warrants for their services.

(c)  Procedures
to account for all revenues, including allocation of certain revenues to funds.

(d)  Procedures
for reconciling the accounting records monthly to the county treasurer.

2.  A
compilation of resources required to implement accounting responsibility,
including, at a minimum, personnel, training and equipment, and a comprehensive
analysis of the budgetary implications of accounting responsibility for the
school district or
charter school and
the county treasurer.

C.  Prior to Before January 1 of the fiscal year
preceding the fiscal year of implementation and before submitting an
application to assume accounting responsibility, a school district or charter school shall apply for evaluation by the
auditor general.  On completion of the evaluation the auditor general
may recommend approval or denial of accounting responsibility to the state
board of education.  The evaluation by the auditor general shall be
performed contingent on staff availability and may be billed to the school
district or
charter school at
cost.  Evaluation at a minimum shall include the following:

1.  The
most recent financial statements audited by an independent certified public
accountant.

2.  The
most recent report on internal control, report on compliance and uniform system
of financial records compliance questionnaire prepared by an independent
certified public accountant or procedural review completed by the auditor general.

3.  The
working papers of the independent certified public accountant responsible for
auditing the school district or charter school, if deemed appropriate by the
auditor general.

4.  A
procedural review if deemed appropriate by the auditor general.

D.  School
districts and
charter schools that
are approved by the state board of education to assume accounting
responsibility shall contract with an independent certified public accountant
for an annual financial and compliance audit.  The auditor general may
reevaluate the school district or charter school annually based on the audit to
determine compliance with the uniform system of financial records.  If
permitted by federal law, a school district or charter school may convert to a biennial audit
schedule if the previous annual audit conducted pursuant to this subsection did
not contain any significant negative findings.  If a biennial audit
of a school district or
charter school conducted
pursuant to this subsection contains any significant negative findings, the
school district or
charter school shall
convert back to an annual audit schedule.  If a school district or charter school is required to convert back to an
annual audit schedule pursuant to this subsection because of significant
negative findings, the school district or charter school may subsequently convert to a
biennial audit schedule if the previous two annual audits did not contain any
significant negative findings.  For the purposes of this subsection,
"significant negative finding" means a finding that results in the
issuance of a letter of noncompliance from the auditor general.

E.  To
assume accounting responsibility,
a school district or
charter school shall
notify the county treasurer and the county school superintendent of its
intention before March 1 of the fiscal year preceding the fiscal year of
implementation.  On notification, the county treasurer shall establish
acceptable standards for interface by school districts and charter schools with the county treasurer,
including specifications for computer hardware and software compatibility and
procedures to ensure the capacity of each school district and charter school for reconciliation of accounts
with those of the county treasurer.

F.  Any
school district or
charter school that
fails to maintain accounting standards as provided by the uniform system of
financial records and that is found to be in noncompliance with the uniform
system of financial records by the state board of education as provided in
section 15‑272 is not eligible to participate in the program provided by
this section.

G.  Any
school district or
charter school that
has assumed accounting responsibility pursuant to this section, that fails to
maintain accounting standards as provided by the uniform system of financial
records and that is found to be in noncompliance with the uniform system of
financial records by the state board of education as provided in section 15‑272
is no longer eligible to participate in the program provided by this section.

H.  For
the purposes of this section, "accounting responsibility" means
authority for a school district or charter school to operate with full independence
from the county school superintendent with respect to revenues and
expenditures, including allocating revenues, monitoring vouchers, authorizing
and issuing warrants and maintaining and verifying staff records for
certification and payroll purposes. END_STATUTE

Sec. 8.  Section 15-914.02, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE15-914.02.  School
district or charter school audit

A school
district or
charter school that
is subject to audit pursuant to section 41‑1279.03 shall comply with the
reporting, follow‑up and hearing participation requirements of that
section. END_STATUTE

Sec. 9.  Section 41-1279.03, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-1279.03.  Powers
and duties

A.  The
auditor general shall:

1.  Prepare
an audit plan for approval by the committee and report to the committee the
results of each audit and investigation and other reviews conducted by the
auditor general.

2.  Conduct
or cause to be conducted at least biennial financial and compliance audits of
financial transactions and accounts kept by or for all state agencies subject
to the single audit act of 1984 (P.L. 98‑502).  The audits shall be
conducted in accordance with generally accepted governmental auditing standards
and accordingly shall include tests of the accounting records and other
auditing procedures as may be considered necessary in the circumstances.  The
audits shall include the issuance of suitable reports as required by the single
audit act of 1984 (P.L. 98‑502) so that the legislature, the federal government and others will
be informed as to the adequacy of financial statements of the state in compliance
with generally accepted governmental accounting principles and to determine
whether the state has complied with laws and regulations that may have a
material effect on the financial statements and on major federal assistance
programs.

3.  Perform
procedural reviews for all state agencies at times determined by the auditor
general.  These reviews may include evaluation of administrative and
accounting internal controls and reports on these reviews.

4.  Perform
special research requests, special audits and related assignments as designated
by the committee and conduct performance audits, special audits, special
research requests and investigations of any state agency, whether created by
the constitution or otherwise, as may be requested by the committee.

5.  Annually
on or before the fourth Monday of December, prepare a written report to the
governor and to the committee that contains a summary of activities for the
previous fiscal year.

6.  In
the tenth year and in each fifth year thereafter in which a transportation
excise tax is in effect in a county as provided in section 42‑6106 or 42‑6107,
conduct a performance audit that:

(a)  Reviews
past expenditures and future planned expenditures of the transportation excise
revenues and determines the impact of the expenditures in solving
transportation problems within the county and, for a transportation excise tax
in effect in a county as provided in section 42‑6107, determines whether
the expenditures of the transportation excise revenues comply with section 28‑6392,
subsection B.

(b)  Reviews
projects completed to date and projects to be completed during the remaining
years in which a transportation excise tax is in effect.  Within six
months after each review period,
the auditor general shall present a report to the speaker of the house of
representatives and the president of the senate detailing findings and making
recommendations.  

(c)  Reviews,
determines, reports and makes recommendations to the speaker of the house of
representatives and the president of the senate whether the distribution of
highway user revenues complies with title 28, chapter 18, article 2.  

7.  If
requested by the committee, conduct performance audits of counties and
incorporated cities and towns receiving highway user revenue fund monies
pursuant to title 28, chapter 18, article 2 to determine if the monies are
being spent as provided in section 28‑6533, subsection B.

8.  Perform
special audits designated pursuant to law if the auditor general determines
that there are adequate monies appropriated for the auditor general to complete
the audit.  If the auditor general determines the appropriated monies
are inadequate, the auditor general shall notify the committee.

9.  Establish
a school‑wide schoolwide audit team in the office of the auditor
general to conduct performance audits and monitor school districts and charter schools
to determine
the percentage of every dollar spent in the classroom by a  the school district or charter school.  The performance
audits shall determine whether school districts and charter schools that receive monies from the
Arizona structured English immersion fund established by section 15‑756.04
and the statewide compensatory instruction fund established by section 15‑756.11
are in compliance with title 15, chapter 7, article 3.1.  The auditor
general shall determine, through random selection, the school districts and charter schools
to be audited
each year, subject to review by the joint legislative audit committee.  A
school district or
charter school that
is subject to an audit pursuant to this paragraph shall notify the auditor
general in writing as to whether the school district or charter school agrees or disagrees with the
findings and recommendations of the audit and whether the school district or charter school will implement the findings and
recommendations, implement modifications to the findings and recommendations or
refuse to implement the findings and recommendations.  The school district or charter school shall submit to the auditor
general a written status report on the implementation of the audit findings and
recommendations every six months for two years after an audit conducted
pursuant to this paragraph.  The auditor general shall review the school
district's or
charter school's progress
toward implementing the findings and recommendations of the audit every six
months after receipt of the district's or charter school's status report for two years.  The
auditor general may review a school district's or charter school's progress beyond this two‑year
period for recommendations that have not yet been implemented by the school
district or
charter school. 
The auditor general shall provide a status report of these reviews to the joint
legislative audit committee.  The school district or charter school shall participate in any hearing
scheduled during this review period by the joint legislative audit committee or
by any other legislative committee designated by the joint legislative audit
committee.

10.  Annually
review per diem compensation and reimbursement of expenses for employees of the
state and members of a state board, commission, council or advisory committee
by judgmentally selecting samples and evaluating the propriety of per diem
compensation and expense reimbursements.

B.  The
auditor general may:

1.  Subject
to approval by the committee, adopt rules necessary to administer the duties of
the office.

2.  Hire
consultants to conduct the studies required by subsection A, paragraphs 6 and 7
of this section.

C.  If
approved by the committee, the auditor general may charge a
reasonable fee for the cost of performing audits or providing accounting
services for auditing federal funds, special audits or special services
requested by political subdivisions of the state.  Monies collected
pursuant to this subsection shall be deposited in the audit services revolving
fund.

D.  The
department of transportation, the board of supervisors of a county that has
approved a county transportation excise tax as provided in section 42‑6106
or 42‑6107 and the governing bodies of counties, cities and towns
receiving highway user revenue fund monies shall cooperate with and provide
necessary information to the auditor general or the auditor general's
consultant.

E.  The
department of transportation shall reimburse the auditor general as follows,
and the auditor general shall deposit the reimbursed monies in the audit
services revolving fund:

1.  For
the cost of conducting the studies or hiring a consultant to conduct the
studies required by subsection A, paragraph 6, subdivisions (a) and (b) of this
section, from monies collected pursuant to a county transportation excise tax
levied pursuant to section 42‑6106 or 42‑6107.

2.  For
the cost of conducting the studies or hiring a consultant pursuant to
subsection A, paragraph 6, subdivision (c) and paragraph 7 of this section,
from the Arizona highway user revenue fund. END_STATUTE

Sec. 10.  Section 41-1279.04, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-1279.04.  Authority
to examine records; violation; classification

A.  The
auditor general or the auditor general's authorized representatives, in the
performance of official duties, shall have access to, and authority to examine,
any and all books, accounts, reports, vouchers, correspondence files and other
records, bank accounts, criminal history record information as defined in
section 41‑1701, money and other property of any state agency, board,
commission, department, institution, program, advisory council or committee or
political subdivision of this state, whether created by the constitution or
otherwise, or such documents and property of a contractor relating to a
contract with this state pursuant to the provisions of section 35‑214.  It is the duty of Any officer or employee of any
such agency or political subdivision,  having such records under the
officer's or employee's control, to
shall permit access to and examination
of the records on the request of the auditor general or the auditor general's
authorized representative.

B.  For
the purpose of complying with section 41‑1279.03, subsection A,
paragraphs 4 and 9, the auditor general or the auditor general's authorized
representative, in the performance of official duties, may attend executive
sessions of the governing body of any state agency, or school district or charter school in this state.

C.  For
the purpose of auditing the department of revenue, the auditor general and the
auditor general's authorized representatives have access to state tax returns,
except that a report of the auditor general shall not violate the
confidentiality of state tax laws.

D.  Any
officer or person who knowingly fails or refuses to permit such access and
examination is guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. END_STATUTE

