

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 28-3002, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE28-3002.  Fees;
driver licenses; disposition; exemption

A.  The
following fees are required:

1.  For
each original or initial application or renewal application, if a written
examination is required, for the following:

(a)  Class
A driver license, twenty‑five dollars.

(b)  Class
B driver license, twenty‑five dollars.

(c)  Class
C driver license, twelve dollars fifty cents.

(d)  Class
D driver license issued pursuant to section 28‑3171, ten dollars.

(e)  Class
M driver license issued pursuant to section 28‑3171, ten dollars.

2.  Except
as provided in paragraph 1, for each original, renewal or reinstatement
application for a class D, G or M license:

Age                                         Fee  

50
or older                               $10.00

45‑49                                     $15.00

40‑44                                     $20.00

39 or
younger                             $25.00

3.  For
each original or initial application or renewal examination, if a written
application is required, for the following endorsements to a driver license:

(a)  Bus
endorsement, ten dollars.

(b)  Hazardous
materials endorsement, ten dollars.

(c)  Tank
vehicle endorsement, ten dollars.

(d)  Double‑triple
trailer endorsement, ten dollars.

(e)  Motorcycle
endorsement, seven dollars.

4.  For
taking each driving test for a:

(a)  Class
A driver license, twenty‑five dollars.

(b)  Class
B driver license, twenty‑five dollars.

(c)  Class
C driver license, twelve dollars fifty cents.

(d)  Bus
endorsement, five dollars.

5.  For
each application for an instruction permit under:

(a)  Section
28‑3154 or 28‑3156, seven dollars.

(b)  Section
28‑3155, three dollars.

(c)  Section
28‑3225, class A, twenty‑five dollars.

(d)  Section
28‑3225, class B, twenty‑five dollars.

(e)  Section
28‑3225, class C, twelve dollars fifty cents.

6.  For
each renewal application, if a written examination is not required, for a:

(a)  Class
A driver license and any endorsement, other than a hazardous materials
endorsement, to the license, fifteen dollars.

(b)  Class
B driver license and any endorsement, other than a hazardous materials
endorsement, to the license, fifteen dollars.

(c)  Class
C driver license and any endorsement, other than a hazardous materials
endorsement, to the license, ten dollars.

7.  For
each application for a duplicate of a driver license, an amount determined by
the director.

8.  For
each application for a duplicate of an instruction permit, two dollars.

9.  In
addition to the fees prescribed in paragraph 2 and except as provided in
paragraph 11:

(a)  For
reinstatement of driving privileges after suspension or disqualification, ten
dollars.

(b)  For
reinstatement of driving privileges after revocation, twenty dollars.

10.  For
each application for an extension by mail of a driver license, five dollars.

11.  In
addition to the fees prescribed in paragraph 2, for reinstatement of driving
privileges that were suspended or denied pursuant to section 28‑1385
after completion of the suspension or revocation, fifty dollars.

12.  For
vision screening tests of out‑of‑state drivers, five dollars.

13.  For
class D or M driver license skills tests for out‑of‑state drivers,
fifteen dollars.

14.  For
a driver license or nonoperating identification license issued pursuant to
section 28‑3175, an amount to be determined by the director.

B.  Except
as otherwise provided by statute, the director shall immediately deposit,
pursuant to sections 35‑146 and 35‑147, fees collected under this
section in the Arizona highway user revenue fund.

C.  The
fees established pursuant to this section do not apply to a veteran who does
not have a residence address or whose residence address is the address of a
shelter that provides services to the homeless.  for the purposes of this
subsection, "veteran" has the same meaning prescribed in section
41-601. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 28-3158, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE28-3158.  Driver
license or instruction permit application

A.  A
person who applies for an instruction permit or for a driver license shall use
a form furnished by the department.

B.  An
applicant shall pay the fee prescribed by section 28‑3002 for a driver
license or for an instruction permit issued under section 28‑3154, 28‑3155,
28‑3156 or 28‑3225.  Payment of the fee required by this section
entitles the applicant to not more than three attempts to pass the written
examination or road test within twelve months from the date of the
application.  The department shall refund an application fee pursuant
to section 28‑373.

C.  An
applicant for an instruction permit or a driver license shall give the
department satisfactory proof of the applicant's full legal name, date of
birth, sex and residence address, if the applicant has a residence
address, and that the applicant's presence in the United States is
authorized under federal law.

D.  The
application for an instruction permit or a driver license shall state the
following:

1.  A
brief description of the applicant and any other identifying information
required by the department.

2.  Whether
the applicant has been licensed, and if so, the type of license issued, when
the license was issued and what state or country issued the license.

3.  Whether
the license was suspended or revoked or whether an application was ever
refused, and if so, the date of and reason for the suspension, revocation or
refusal.

4.  If
the applicant was never licensed, the applicant's last previous state or
country of residence.

5.  The
social security number of the applicant.

E.  The
department shall:

1.  Verify
that a social security number provided by an applicant is a valid number
assigned to that applicant.

2.  Retain
the social security number in its records.

F.  The
social security number provided to the department pursuant to subsection D of
this section for an applicant's driver license or instruction permit shall not
appear on an applicant's driver license or instruction permit unless the
applicant requests that the social security number appear on the applicant's
driver license or instruction permit as the driver license or instruction
permit number.  Except as provided in sections 28‑455 and 41‑1954,
the department shall not release the social security number to any person
unless the applicant requests that the social security number appear on the
applicant's driver license or instruction permit as the driver license or
instruction permit number.  The provisions of this subsection shall
be included in each application.

G.  The
department may adopt and implement procedures to deny a driver license or
instruction permit to a person who has been deported.  The department
may adopt and implement procedures to reinstate a person's privilege to apply
for a driver license or permit if the person's legal presence status is
restored.

H.  On
request of an applicant, the department shall allow the applicant to provide on
the license or permit a post office box address that is regularly used by the
applicant.

I.  The
department may request an applicant who appears in person for a license, a
duplicate license or reinstatement of a driving privilege to complete
satisfactorily the vision screening prescribed by the department.

J.  If
a driver license applicant submits satisfactory proof to the department that
the applicant is a veteran, on request of the applicant, the department shall
allow a distinguishing mark to appear on the license that identifies the person
as a veteran. END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Section 28-3165, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE28-3165.  Nonoperating
identification license; immunity; rules; emancipated minors; definition

A.  On
receipt of an application from a person who does not have a valid driver
license issued by this state or whose driving privilege is suspended, the
department shall issue a nonoperating identification license that contains a
distinguishing number assigned to the licensee, the full legal name, the date
of birth, the residence address and a brief description of the licensee and
either a facsimile of the signature of the licensee or a space on which the
licensee is required to write the licensee's usual signature with pen and ink. 
A nonoperating identification license that is issued to a person whose driving
privilege is suspended shall not be valid for more than one hundred eighty days
from the date of issuance.

B.  On
request of an applicant:  

1.  The
department shall allow the applicant to provide on the nonoperating
identification license a post office box address that is regularly used by the
applicant.

2.  If
the applicant submits satisfactory proof to the department that the applicant
is a veteran, the department shall allow a distinguishing mark to appear on the
nonoperating identification license that identifies that person as a veteran.

C.  A
person who is issued a license pursuant to this section shall use it only for
identification purposes of the licensee.  The nonoperating identification
license does not grant authority to operate a motor vehicle in this
state.  The department shall clearly label the nonoperating
identification license "for identification only, not for operation of a
motor vehicle".

D.  On
issuance of a driver license, the holder of a nonoperating identification
license shall surrender the nonoperating identification license to the
department and the department shall not refund any fee paid for the issuance of
the nonoperating identification license.

E.  A
nonoperating identification license shall contain the photograph of the
licensee.  The department shall use a process in the issuance of nonoperating
identification licenses that prohibits as nearly as possible the ability to
superimpose a photograph on the license without ready detection. The department
shall process nonoperating identification licenses and photo attachments in
color.

F.  On
application, an applicant shall give the department satisfactory proof of the
applicant's full legal name, date of birth, sex and residence address, if the applicant has a residence address, and that the
applicant's presence in the United States is authorized under federal law.  The
application shall briefly describe the applicant, state whether the applicant
has been licensed, and if so, the type of license issued, when and by what
state or country and whether any such license is under suspension, revocation
or cancellation.  The application shall contain other identifying information
required by the department.

G.  The
department may adopt and implement procedures to deny a nonoperating
identification license to a person who has been deported.  The
department may adopt and implement procedures to reinstate a person's privilege
to apply for a nonoperating identification license if the person's legal presence
status is restored.

H.  A
nonoperating identification license issued by the department is solely for the
use and convenience of the applicant for identification purposes.

I.  The
department shall adopt rules and establish fees for issuance of a nonoperating
identification license, except that the department shall not require an
examination.

J.  The fees established pursuant to this section do not apply to any of
the following:

1.  A person who is sixty‑five
years of age or older. and

2.  A person who is a recipient of
public monies as an individual with a disability under title XVI of the social
security act, as amended, are exempt from the fees
established pursuant to this section.

3.  A
veteran who does not have a residence address.

4.  A
veteran whose residence address is the address of a shelter that provides
services to the homeless.

K.  If
a person qualifies for a nonoperating identification license and is under the
legal drinking age, the department shall issue a license that is marked by
color, code or design to immediately distinguish it from a nonoperating
identification license issued to a person of legal drinking age. The department
shall indicate on the nonoperating identification license issued pursuant to
this subsection the year in which the person will attain the legal drinking
age. 

L.  If
a minor has been emancipated pursuant to title 12, chapter 15, on application
and proof of emancipation, the department shall issue a nonoperating
identification license that contains the words "emancipated minor".

M.  For
the purposes of this section, "veteran" has the same meaning
prescribed in section 41-601.
END_STATUTE

Sec. 4.  Section 28-3166, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE28-3166.  Driver
license content and application; marked licenses; emancipated minors

A.  The
department shall issue a driver license to a qualified
applicant.  The driver license shall contain a distinguishing number
assigned to the licensee, the license class, any endorsements, the licensee's
full name, date of birth and residence address, if the licensee
has a residence address, a brief description of the licensee and either
a facsimile of the signature of the licensee or a space on which the licensee
is required to write the licensee's usual signature with pen and ink.  A driver
license is not valid until it is signed by the licensee.  On request
of an applicant:  

1.  The
department shall allow the applicant to provide on the driver license a post
office box address that is regularly used by the applicant and that is located
in the county in which the applicant resides.

2.  If
the applicant submits satisfactory proof to the department that the applicant
is a veteran, the department shall allow a distinguishing mark to appear on the
license that identifies the person as a veteran.

B.  An
application for a driver license and the driver license issued shall contain
the photo image of the applicant or licensee.  The department shall use a
process in the issuance of driver licenses that prohibits as nearly as possible
the ability to alter or reproduce the license or that prohibits the ability to
superimpose a photo image on the license without ready detection.  The
department shall process driver licenses and photo images in color.  This
subsection does not apply to a driver license that is renewed by mail pursuant
to section 28‑3172.

C.  An
applicant who is at least sixteen or older
but under twenty‑four years of age shall provide the department with
satisfactory proof of the applicant's legal name and date of birth.

D.  If
a person is qualified for a driver license and is under the legal drinking age,
the department shall issue a license that is marked by color, code or design to
immediately distinguish it from a license issued to a person of legal drinking
age.  The department shall indicate on the driver license issued pursuant to
this subsection the year in which the person will attain the legal drinking
age.

E.  The
department shall mark a special ignition interlock restricted driver license
issued pursuant to chapter 4, article 3.1 of this title by color, code or
design to immediately distinguish it from other licenses issued by the
department.

F.  If
a person is qualified for a driver license but is subject to the certified
ignition interlock device limitations prescribed in section 28‑1381, 28‑1382,
28‑1383 or 28‑3319, the department shall issue a license that is
marked by color, code or design to immediately distinguish it from other
licenses issued by the department.

G.  The
department shall not include information in the magnetic stripe and bar code of
a driver license other than information that the department is authorized to
obtain and place on a driver license pursuant to this article.

H.  If
a minor has been emancipated pursuant to title 12, chapter 15, on application
and proof of emancipation, the department shall issue a driver license that
contains the words "emancipated minor". END_STATUTE

