

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 31-201.01, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE31-201.01.  Duties
of the director; tort actions; medical treatment costs; state immunity;
definitions

A.  The
director shall hold in custody all persons who are sentenced to the department under
the law and shall hold such persons for the term directed by the court, subject
to law.

B.  In
addition to the medical and health services to be provided pursuant to
subsection D of this section, the director may, in cooperation with the
department of health services, may provide
to prisoners psychiatric care and treatment pursuant to sections 31‑226
and 31‑226.01.

C.  The
director may institute and pursue programs which that promote the rehabilitation of the
prisoners in the director's charge.

D.  The
director shall provide medical and health services for the
prisoners.  The director may contract for professional services to
assist the director in carrying out this responsibility on behalf of the state,
provided except that all records made and retained
in connection with the services provided by this subsection shall be made and
retained only by duly authorized or qualified medical and professional
personnel and not by any prisoner.  Such records when not in use
shall be retained in a safe and secure place.  For the purposes of this
subsection, Medical and health services do not include gender reassignment
surgery.

E.  If
a victim of a person for whom a cost of incarceration has been calculated
notifies the state that full restitution has not been made by the person for
whom a cost of incarceration has been calculated, the state shall interplead
with the superior court the disputed amount and set off the amounts owed the
state from the remaining obligation.

F.  Any
and all causes of action which that may arise out of tort caused by
the director, prison officers or employees of the department, within the scope
of their legal duty, shall run only against the state.

G.  The
director shall establish by rule reasonable medical and health service services fees for the medical and health
services that are provided pursuant to subsection D of this
section.  Except as provided in subsection I of this section, every
inmate shall be charged a reasonable medical and health services fee for each
medical visit an inmate makes pursuant to a health needs request form or for
emergency treatment.

H.  Except
as provided in subsection I of this section, the director may charge each
inmate a reasonable fee for prescriptions, medication or prosthetic devices.

I.  The
director shall exempt the following inmates or medical visits by inmates from
payment of medical and health services fees and fees for prescriptions,
medication or prosthetic devices:

1.  Medical
visits initiated by the medical or mental health staff of the department.

2.  Medical
visits to a physician by inmates who are referred by a physician assistant or
nurse practitioner.

3.  Inmates
at reception centers.

4.  Juvenile
inmates.

5.  Pregnant
inmates.

6.  Seriously
mentally ill inmates.  For the purposes of this paragraph,
"seriously mentally ill inmates" means inmates who as a result of a
mental disorder as defined in section 36‑501 exhibit emotional or
behavioral functioning which is so impaired as to interfere substantially with
their capacity to remain in the general prison population without supportive
treatment or services of a long‑term or indefinite duration and whose
mental disability is severe and persistent, resulting in a long‑term
limitation of their functional capacities for primary activities of daily
living, including interpersonal relationships, self‑care, employment and
recreation.

7.  Inmates
with developmental disabilities who are housed in a special programs unit.

8.  Inmates
who are housed in unit 8 at the Florence prison facility.

9.  Inmates
who are inpatients at the Alhambra prison facility special programs psychiatric
hospital.

10.  Inmates
who are inpatients at the Flamenco prison facility mental health treatment
unit.

11.  Inmates
who are undergoing administrative physical examinations for statewide driver
status and fire fighting crews.

12.  Inmates
who are undergoing follow‑up medical treatment for chronic diseases.

J.  An
inmate shall not be refused medical treatment for financial reasons.

K.  All
monies received by the department for medical and health service services fees shall be deposited in the
general fund.

L.  A
person who is convicted of a felony offense and who is incarcerated while
awaiting sentence or while serving a sentence imposed by a court of law may not
bring a cause of action seeking damages or equitable relief from the state or
its political subdivisions, agencies, officers or employees for injuries
suffered while in the custody of the state or its political subdivisions or
agencies unless the complaint alleges specific facts from which the court may
conclude that the plaintiff suffered serious physical injury or the claim is
authorized by a federal statute.

M.  The
director shall establish criteria for reasonable deductions from monies
credited to the prisoner's spendable account to repay the cost of:

1.  State
property that the inmate wilfully damages or destroys during the inmate's
incarceration.

2.  Medical
treatment for injuries that the inmate inflicts on himself or others.

3.  Searching
for and apprehending an inmate who escapes or attempts to escape.

4.  Quelling
a riot or other disturbance in which the inmate is unlawfully involved.

N.  For
the purposes of this section:

1.  "Reasonable
fee" means an amount not to exceed five dollars.

2.  "Serious
physical injury" means an impairment of physical condition that creates a
substantial risk of death or that causes serious disfigurement, prolonged
impairment of health or prolonged loss or impairment of the function of any
bodily organ.END_STATUTE

