

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 4-205.06, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE4-205.06.  Hotel
or motel minibars; rules; definitions

A.  Notwithstanding
any other statute, a hotel or motel may sell spirituous liquor in sealed
containers in individual portions to its registered guests at any time by means
of a minibar located in the guest rooms of those registered guests, if all of
the following conditions are met:

1.  Before
providing a key, magnetic card or other similar device required to attain
access to the minibar in a particular guest room to the registered guest, or
before otherwise providing access to the minibar to the registered guest, the
licensee verifies that each registered guest to whom a key, magnetic card or
similar device is provided or to whom access is otherwise provided is not a
person under the legal drinking age.

2.  All
employees handling the spirituous liquors to be placed in the minibar in any
guest room, including an employee who inventories or restocks and replenishes
the spirituous liquors in the minibar, are at least nineteen EIGHTEEN years of age.

3.  The
minibar is not replenished or restocked with spirituous liquor between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 

4.  The
minibar is located on the premises of a person who has been issued an on‑sale
retailer's license.

5.  The
minibar contains no more than thirty individual portions of spirituous liquor
at any one time.

B.  A
minibar may be part of another cabinet or similar device, whether refrigerated
in whole or in part or nonrefrigerated, from which nonalcoholic beverages or
food may be purchased by the guests in hotel or motel guest
rooms.  The portion of the cabinet or similar device in which
spirituous liquors are stored shall comply with the requirements of this
section.

C.  The
director may prescribe rules to regulate the use of a minibar including rules
on the size of containers of spirituous liquors and may by rule reduce from
thirty the number of containers of spirituous liquor placed in the minibar.

D.  For
the purposes of this section:

1.  "Hotel"
or "motel" means an establishment that is licensed to sell spirituous
liquors and that contains guest room accommodations with respect to which the
predominant relationship existing between the occupants of the rooms and the
owner or operator of the establishment is that of innkeeper and
guest.  For the purposes of this paragraph, the existence of other
legal relationships as between some occupants and the owner or operator is
immaterial.

2.  "Minibar"
means a closed container, either refrigerated in whole or in part or
nonrefrigerated, where access to the interior is restricted by means of a
locking device that requires the use of a key, magnetic card or similar device.
END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 4-244, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE4-244.  Unlawful
acts

It is
unlawful:

1.  For
a person to buy for resale, sell or deal in spirituous liquors in this state
without first having procured a license duly issued by the board, except that
the director may issue a temporary permit of any series pursuant to section 4‑205.05
to a trustee in bankruptcy to acquire and dispose of the spirituous liquor of a
debtor.

2.  For
a person to sell or deal in alcohol for beverage purposes without first
complying with this title.

3.  For
a distiller, vintner, brewer or wholesaler knowingly to sell, dispose of or
give spirituous liquor to any person other than a licensee except in sampling
wares as may be necessary in the ordinary course of business, except in
donating spirituous liquor to a nonprofit organization that has obtained a
special event license for the purpose of charitable fund raising activities or
except in donating spirituous liquor with a cost to the distiller, brewer or
wholesaler of up to five hundred dollars in a calendar year to an organization
that is exempt from federal income taxes under section 501(c) (3), (4), (6) or (7)
of the internal revenue code and not licensed under this title.

4.  For
a distiller, vintner or brewer to require a wholesaler to offer or grant a
discount to a retailer, unless the discount has also been offered and granted
to the wholesaler by the distiller, vintner or brewer.

5.  For
a distiller, vintner or brewer to use a vehicle for trucking or transportation
of spirituous liquors unless there is affixed to both sides of the vehicle a
sign showing the name and address of the licensee and the type and number of
the person's license in letters not less than three and one‑half inches
in height.

6.  For
a person to take or solicit orders for spirituous liquors unless the person is
a salesman or solicitor of a licensed wholesaler, a salesman or solicitor of a
distiller, brewer, vintner, importer or broker or a registered retail agent.

7.  For
any retail licensee to purchase spirituous liquors from any person other than a
solicitor or salesman of a wholesaler licensed in this state.

8.  For
a retailer to acquire an interest in property owned, occupied or used by a
wholesaler in the wholesaler's business, or in a license with respect to the
premises of the wholesaler.

9.  Except
as provided in paragraphs 10 and 11 of this section, for a licensee or other person
to sell, furnish, dispose of or give, or cause to be sold, furnished, disposed
of or given, to a person under the legal drinking age or for a person under the legal drinking age to buy,
receive, have in the person's possession or consume spirituous liquor.  This
paragraph shall not prohibit the employment by an off‑sale retailer of
persons who are at least sixteen years of age to check out, if supervised by a
person on the premises who is at least nineteen eighteen years of age, package or carry
merchandise, including spirituous liquor, in unbroken packages, for the
convenience of the customer of the employer, if the employer sells primarily
merchandise other than spirituous liquor.

10.  For
a licensee to employ a person under nineteen eighteen years of age to manufacture, sell
or dispose of spirituous liquors.  This paragraph shall not prohibit the
employment by an off‑sale retailer of persons who are at least sixteen
years of age to check out, if supervised by a person on the premises who is at
least nineteen eighteen years of age, package or carry
merchandise, including spirituous liquor, in unbroken packages, for the
convenience of the customer of the employer, if the employer sells primarily
merchandise other than spirituous liquor.

11.  For
an on‑sale retailer to employ a person under nineteen eighteen years of age in any capacity
connected with the handling of spirituous liquors.  This paragraph does not
prohibit the employment by an on‑sale retailer of a person under nineteen eighteen years of age who cleans up the
tables on the premises for reuse, removes dirty dishes, keeps a ready supply of
needed items and helps clean up the premises.

12.  For
a licensee, when engaged in waiting on or serving customers, to consume
spirituous liquor or for a licensee or on‑duty employee to be on or about
the licensed premises while in an intoxicated or disorderly condition.

13.  For
an employee of a retail licensee, during that employee's working hours or in
connection with such employment, to give to or purchase for any other person,
accept a gift of, purchase for himself or consume spirituous liquor, except
that:

(a)  An
employee of a licensee, during that employee's working hours or in connection
with the employment, while the employee is not engaged in waiting on or serving
customers, may give spirituous liquor to or purchase spirituous liquor for any
other person.

(b)  An
employee of an on‑sale retail licensee, during that employee's working
hours or in connection with the employment, while the employee is not engaged
in waiting on or serving customers, may taste samples of beer or wine not to
exceed four ounces per day or distilled spirits not to exceed two ounces per
day provided by an employee of a wholesaler or distributor who is present at
the time of the sampling.

(c)  An
employee of an on‑sale retail licensee, under the supervision of a
manager as part of the employee's training and education, while not engaged in
waiting on or serving customers may taste samples of distilled spirits not to
exceed two ounces per educational session or beer or wine not to exceed four
ounces per educational session, and provided that a licensee shall not have
more than two educational sessions in any thirty day period.

(d)  An
unpaid volunteer who is a bona fide member of a club and who is not engaged in
waiting on or serving spirituous liquor to customers may purchase for himself
and consume spirituous liquor while participating in a scheduled event at the
club.  An unpaid participant in a food competition may purchase for
himself and consume spirituous liquor while participating in the food
competition.

(e)  An
unpaid volunteer of a special event licensee under section 4‑203.02 may
purchase and consume spirituous liquor while not engaged in waiting on or
serving spirituous liquor to customers at the special event.  This
subdivision does not apply to an unpaid volunteer whose responsibilities
include verification of a person's legal drinking age, security or the
operation of any vehicle or heavy machinery.

14.  For
a licensee or other person to serve, sell or furnish spirituous liquor to a
disorderly or obviously intoxicated person, or for a licensee or employee of
the licensee to allow or permit a disorderly or obviously intoxicated person to
come into or remain on or about the premises, except that a licensee or an
employee of the licensee may allow an obviously intoxicated person to remain on
the premises for a period of time of not to exceed thirty minutes after the
state of obvious intoxication is known or should be known to the licensee in
order that a nonintoxicated person may transport the obviously intoxicated
person from the premises.  For the purposes of this section,
"obviously intoxicated" means inebriated to the extent that a
person's physical faculties are substantially impaired and the impairment is
shown by significantly uncoordinated physical action or significant physical
dysfunction that would have been obvious to a reasonable person.

15.  For
an on‑sale or off‑sale retailer or an employee of such retailer to
sell, dispose of, deliver or give spirituous liquor to a person between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.

16.  For
a licensee or employee to knowingly permit any person on or about the licensed
premises to give or furnish any spirituous liquor to any person under twenty‑one
years of age or knowingly permit any person under twenty‑one years of age
to have in the person's possession spirituous liquor on the licensed premises.

17.  For
an on‑sale retailer or an employee of such retailer to allow a person to
consume or possess spirituous liquors on the premises between the hours of 2:30
a.m. and 6:00 a.m.

18.  For
an on‑sale retailer to permit an employee or for an employee to solicit
or encourage others, directly or indirectly, to buy the employee drinks or anything
of value in the licensed premises during the employee's working
hours.  No on‑sale retailer shall serve employees or allow a
patron of the establishment to give spirituous liquor to, purchase liquor for
or drink liquor with any employee during the employee's working hours.

19.  For
an off‑sale retailer or employee to sell spirituous liquor except in the
original unbroken container, to permit spirituous liquor to be consumed on the
premises or to knowingly permit spirituous liquor to be consumed on adjacent
property under the licensee's exclusive control.

20.  For
a person to consume spirituous liquor in a public place, thoroughfare or
gathering.  The license of a licensee permitting a violation of this
paragraph on the premises shall be subject to revocation.  This
paragraph does not apply to the sale of spirituous liquors on the premises of
and by an on‑sale retailer.  This paragraph also does not apply
to a person consuming beer from a broken package in a public recreation area or
on private property with permission of the owner or lessor or on the walkways
surrounding such private property or to a person consuming beer or wine from a
broken package in a public recreation area as part of a special event or
festival that is conducted under a license secured pursuant to section 4‑203.02
or 4‑203.03.

21.  For
a person to have possession of or to transport spirituous liquor that is
manufactured in a distillery, winery, brewery or rectifying plant contrary to
the laws of the United States and this state.  Any property used in
transporting such spirituous liquor shall be forfeited to the state and shall
be seized and disposed of as provided in section 4‑221.

22.  For
an on‑sale retailer or employee to allow a person under the legal
drinking age to remain in an area on the licensed premises during those hours
in which its primary use is the sale, dispensing or consumption of alcoholic
beverages after the licensee, or the licensee's employees, know or should have
known that the person is under the legal drinking age.  An on‑sale
retailer may designate an area of the licensed premises as an area in which
spirituous liquor will not be sold or consumed for the purpose of allowing
underage persons on the premises if the designated area is separated by a
physical barrier and at no time will underage persons have access to the area
in which spirituous liquor is sold or consumed.  A licensee or an
employee of a licensee may require a person who intends to enter a licensed
premises or a portion of a licensed premises where persons under the legal
drinking age are prohibited under this section to exhibit a written instrument
of identification that is acceptable under section 4‑241 as a condition
of entry.  The director, or a municipality, may adopt rules to
regulate the presence of underage persons on licensed premises provided the
rules adopted by a municipality are more stringent than those adopted by the
director.  The rules adopted by the municipality shall be adopted by
local ordinance and shall not interfere with the licensee's ability to comply
with this paragraph.  This paragraph does not apply:

(a)  If
the person under the legal drinking age is accompanied by a spouse, parent or
legal guardian of legal drinking age or is an on‑duty employee of the
licensee.

(b)  If
the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises is a club as defined in section 4‑101,
paragraph 7, subdivision (a) and the person under the legal drinking age is any
of the following:

(i)  An
active duty military service member.

(ii)  A
veteran.

(iii)  A
member of the United States army national guard or the United States air
national guard.

(iv)  A
member of the United States military reserve forces.

(c)  To
the area of the premises used primarily for the serving of food during the
hours when food is served.

23.  For
an on‑sale retailer or employee to conduct drinking contests, to sell or
deliver to a person an unlimited number of spirituous liquor beverages during
any set period of time for a fixed price, to deliver more than fifty ounces of
beer, one liter of wine or four ounces of distilled spirits in any spirituous
liquor drink to one person at one time for that person's consumption or to
advertise any practice prohibited by this paragraph.  The provisions
of this paragraph do not prohibit an on‑sale retailer or employee from
selling and delivering an opened, original container of distilled spirits if:

(a)  Service
or pouring of the spirituous liquor is provided by an employee of the on‑sale
retailer.

(b)  The
employee of the on‑sale retailer monitors consumption to ensure
compliance with this paragraph.  Locking devices may be used, but are
not required.

24.  For
a licensee or employee to knowingly permit the unlawful possession, use, sale
or offer for sale of narcotics, dangerous drugs or marijuana on the
premises.  As used in this paragraph, "dangerous drug" has
the same meaning prescribed in section 13‑3401.

25.  For
a licensee or employee to knowingly permit prostitution or the solicitation of
prostitution on the premises.

26.  For
a licensee or employee to knowingly permit unlawful gambling on the premises.

27.  For
a licensee or employee to knowingly permit trafficking or attempted trafficking
in stolen property on the premises.

28.  For
a licensee or employee to fail or refuse to make the premises or records
available for inspection and examination as provided in this title or to comply
with a lawful subpoena issued under this title.

29.  For
any person other than a peace officer or a member of a sheriff's volunteer
posse while on duty who has received firearms training that is approved by the
Arizona peace officer standards and training board, a retired peace officer as
defined in section 38‑1113 or an honorably retired law enforcement
officer who has been issued a certificate of firearms proficiency pursuant to
section 13‑3112, subsection T, the licensee or an employee of the
licensee acting with the permission of the licensee to be in possession of a
firearm while on the licensed premises of an on‑sale
retailer.  This paragraph shall not be construed to include a
situation in which a person is on licensed premises for a limited time in order
to seek emergency aid and such person does not buy, receive, consume or possess
spirituous liquor.  This paragraph shall not apply to:

(a)  Hotel
or motel guest room accommodations.

(b)  The
exhibition or display of a firearm in conjunction with a meeting, show, class
or similar event.

(c)  A
person with a permit issued pursuant to section 13‑3112 who carries a
concealed handgun on the licensed premises of any on‑sale retailer that
has not posted a notice pursuant to section 4-229.

30.  For
a licensee or employee to knowingly permit a person in possession of a firearm
other than a peace officer or a member of a sheriff's volunteer posse while on
duty who has received firearms training that is approved by the Arizona peace
officer standards and training board, a retired peace officer as defined in
section 38‑1113 or an honorably retired law enforcement officer who has
been issued a certificate of firearms proficiency pursuant to section 13‑3112,
subsection T, the licensee or an employee of the licensee acting with the
permission of the licensee to remain on the licensed premises or to serve, sell
or furnish spirituous liquor to a person in possession of a firearm while on
the licensed premises of an on‑sale retailer.  It shall be a
defense to action under this paragraph if the licensee or employee requested
assistance of a peace officer to remove such person.  This paragraph
shall not apply to:

(a)  Hotel
or motel guest room accommodations.

(b)  The
exhibition or display of a firearm in conjunction with a meeting, show, class
or similar event. 

(c)  A
person with a permit issued pursuant to section 13‑3112 who carries a
concealed handgun on the licensed premises of any on‑sale retailer that
has not posted a notice pursuant to section 4-229.

31.  For
any person in possession of a firearm while on the licensed premises of an
on-sale retailer to consume spirituous liquor.  This paragraph does
not prohibit the consumption of small amounts of spirituous liquor by an
undercover peace officer on assignment to investigate the licensed
establishment.

32.  For
a licensee or employee to knowingly permit spirituous liquor to be removed from
the licensed premises, except in the original unbroken package.  This
paragraph does not apply to any of the following:

(a)  A
person who removes a bottle of wine that has been partially consumed in
conjunction with a purchased meal from licensed premises if a cork is inserted
flush with the top of the bottle or the bottle is otherwise securely closed.

(b)  A
person who is in licensed premises that have noncontiguous portions that are
separated by a public or private walkway or driveway and who takes spirituous
liquor from one portion of the licensed premises across the public or private
walkway or driveway directly to the other portion of the licensed premises.

(c)  A
licensee of a bar, beer and wine bar, liquor store, beer and wine store,
microbrewery or restaurant that has a permit pursuant to section 4‑205.02,
subsection H who dispenses beer only in a clean container composed of a
material approved by a national sanitation organization with a maximum capacity
that does not exceed one gallon and not for consumption on the premises if:

(i)  The
licensee or the licensee's employee fills the container at the tap at the time
of sale.

(ii)  The
container is sealed and displays a government warning label.

(iii)  The
dispensing of that beer is not done through a drive‑through or walk‑up
service window.

33.  For
a person who is obviously intoxicated to buy or attempt to buy spirituous
liquor from a licensee or employee of a licensee or to consume spirituous
liquor on licensed premises.

34.  For
a person under twenty-one years of age to drive or be in physical control of a
motor vehicle while there is any spirituous liquor in the person's body.

35.  For
a person under twenty-one years of age to operate or be in physical control of
a motorized watercraft that is underway while there is any spirituous liquor in
the person's body.  For the purposes of this paragraph,
"underway" has the same meaning prescribed in section 5‑301.

36.  For
a licensee, manager, employee or controlling person to purposely induce a
voter, by means of alcohol, to vote or abstain from voting for or against a
particular candidate or issue on an election day.

37.  For
a licensee to fail to report an occurrence of an act of violence to either the
department or a law enforcement agency.

38.  For
a licensee to use a vending machine for the purpose of dispensing spirituous
liquor.

39.  For
a licensee to offer for sale a wine carrying a label including a reference to
Arizona or any Arizona city, town or geographic location unless at least
seventy‑five percent by volume of the grapes used in making the wine were
grown in Arizona.

40.  For
a retailer to knowingly allow a customer to bring spirituous liquor onto the
licensed premises, except that an on‑sale retailer may allow a wine and
food club to bring wine onto the premises for consumption by the club's members
and guests of the club's members in conjunction with meals purchased at a
meeting of the club that is conducted on the premises and that at least seven
members attend.  An on‑sale retailer who allows wine and food
clubs to bring wine onto its premises under this paragraph shall comply with
all applicable provisions of this title and any rules adopted pursuant to this
title to the same extent as if the on‑sale retailer had sold the wine to
the members of the club and their guests.  For the purposes of this
paragraph, "wine and food club" means an association that has more
than twenty bona fide members paying at least six dollars per year in dues and
that has been in existence for at least one year.

41.  For
a person under twenty‑one years of age to have in the person's body any
spirituous liquor.  In a prosecution for a violation of this
paragraph:

(a)  Pursuant
to section 4‑249, it is a defense that the spirituous liquor was consumed
in connection with the bona fide practice of a religious belief or as an
integral part of a religious exercise and in a manner not dangerous to public
health or safety.

(b)  Pursuant
to section 4‑226, it is a defense that the spirituous liquor was consumed
for a bona fide medicinal purpose and in a manner not dangerous to public
health or safety.

42.  For
an employee of a licensee to accept any gratuity, compensation, remuneration or
consideration of any kind to either:

(a)  Permit
a person who is under twenty-one years of age to enter any portion of the
premises where that person is prohibited from entering pursuant to paragraph 22
of this section.

(b)  Sell,
furnish, dispose of or give spirituous liquor to a person who is under twenty‑one
years of age.

43.  For
a person to purchase, offer for sale or use any device, machine or process that
mixes spirituous liquor with pure oxygen or another gas to produce a vaporized
product for the purpose of consumption by inhalation or to allow patrons to use
any item for the consumption of vaporized spirituous liquor.

44.  For
a retail licensee or an employee of a retail licensee to sell spirituous liquor
to a person if the retail licensee or employee knows the person intends to
resell the spirituous liquor.

45.  Except
as authorized by paragraph 32, subdivision (c) of this section, for a person to
reuse a bottle or other container authorized for use by the laws of the United
States or any agency of the United States for the packaging of distilled
spirits or for a person to increase the original contents or a portion of the
original contents remaining in a liquor bottle or other authorized container by
adding any substance. END_STATUTE

