

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 15-1655, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE15-1655.  Arizona
teacher academy; tuition waiver; annual report

A.  For the 2017‑2018
academic year, universities under the jurisdiction of the Arizona board of
regents shall implement an
The Arizona teacher academy is established to incentivize Arizona resident
students to enter the teaching profession and to commit to teach in Arizona
public schools.  The Arizona board of regents, in consultation with
universities under the jurisdiction of the board, shall develop:

1.  Metrics to assess
the efficacy of the academy.

2.  A marketing and
promotion plan to recruit students for the academy.

B.  The
Arizona teacher academy may include new or existing teacher preparation program
pathways that are student-focused and that employ proven, research-based models
of best practices already being implemented. Each university may develop a
portfolio of teacher preparation programs to offer as part of the
academy.  Programs offered as part of the academy shall include
accelerated models for:

1.  High‑demand
teacher specializations, including science, technology, engineering and
mathematics.

2.  Individuals
seeking postbaccalaureate coursework that results in professional
certification.

C.  Each
university shall develop formalized partnerships with public schools in this
state to build commitments for teacher employment on completion of the Arizona
teacher academy.  The targeted deployment of teachers who have
completed the academy shall be based on the needs of each school system and the
community that is being served as well as the individual skills of each
teacher.

D.  Each
university shall provide to
each full‑time
student who
is enrolled in
the Arizona teacher academy an annual waiver for all tuition and fees
associated with the student's program of study, subject to the following:

1.  If
the student does not successfully complete the academic year in good academic
standing, the student shall reimburse the university for the total amount of
the waiver for tuition and fees the student received for that year.

2.  For
each academic year that the student successfully completes and for which the
student receives a waiver for all tuition and fees, the student must agree to
teach for one full school year in a public school in this state.

3.  If
the student does not fulfill the student's agreement to teach in a public
school, the student must reimburse the university for the proportional amount
of the waiver for tuition and fees that the student received that corresponds
to the number of school years the student agreed to teach but did not teach in
a public school in this state.

4.  If
the student is physically or mentally unable to fulfill the requirements of the
academy, the university shall assess the student's ability to repay the
financial assistance received and shall make a determination on any terms of
repayment.

E.  On
or before July 1, 2018 and each year thereafter, the Arizona board of regents
shall report to the governor, the president of the senate and the speaker of
the house of representatives, and submit a copy to the secretary of state, on
all of the following:

1.  The
total number of students enrolled in the Arizona teacher academy of each
university.

2.  The
percentage of students who completed each year of the academy and who plan to
continue to the subsequent year, delineated by each teacher preparation program
offered by each university as part of the Arizona teacher academy.

3.  The
number of teachers who completed a program of study through the Arizona teacher
academy.

4.  The
number of teachers currently teaching in a public school in this state as part
of an agreement for receiving a full tuition and fee waiver.

5.  The
number of students who have defaulted on their agreement and who are in
repayment agreements. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Appropriation;
Arizona teacher academy; exemption; intent

A.  The
sum of $5,500,000 is appropriated from the state general fund in fiscal year
2018-2019 to the Arizona board of regents for the operation of the Arizona
teacher academy established by section 15-1655, Arizona Revised Statutes, as
amended by this act.

B.  The
appropriation made in subsection A of this section is exempt from the
provisions of section 35-190, Arizona Revised Statutes, relating to lapsing of
appropriations.

C.  It
is the intent of the legislature that the appropriation made in subsection A of
this section be offset by eliminating state funding for the school of civic and
economic thought and leadership operated within Arizona state university and
the center for the philosophy of freedom operated within the university of
Arizona.

