

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 9-500.40, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE9-500.40.  Structured
sober living homes; standards; definitions

A.  A
city or town may adopt by ordinance standards for structured sober living homes
that comply with state and federal fair housing laws and the Americans with
disabilities act.  If adopted, the standards for structured sober
living homes may include:

1.  A
written notification from all structured sober living homes that includes:

(a)  The
name and address of the structured sober living home.

(b)  The
following information regarding the property:

(i)  The
property owner's name, address and contact telephone number.

(ii)  If
the property is leased, a copy of the lease that states that the property will
be used as a structured sober living home.

2.  Supervision
requirements in the structured sober living home for the residents during all
hours of operation.

3.  The
establishment and maintenance of an operation plan that facilitates the
rehabilitative process, including discharge planning, and that addresses the
maintenance of the property and noise abatement consistent with local
ordinances.

B.  A city or town that adopts standards for structured
sober living homes pursuant to subsection A of this section:

1.  Shall
require structured sober living homes to develop policies and procedures to
allow individuals on medication-assisted treatment to continue to receive this
treatment while living in the structured sober living home.

2.  May exclude from regulation any
structured sober living home that is subject to adequate oversight by another
governmental entity or contractor.

C.  For the purposes of this section: , 

1.  "Medication‑assisted
treatment" has the same meaning prescribed in section 32‑3201.01.

2.  "Structured sober living
home":

1.  (a)  Means
any premises, place or building that provides alcohol‑free or drug‑free
housing, promotes independent living and life skill development and provides
structured activities that are directed primarily toward recovery from
substance use disorders in a supervised setting to a group of unrelated
individuals who are recovering from drug or alcohol addiction and who are
receiving outpatient behavioral health services for substance abuse or
addiction treatment while living in the home.

2.  (b)  Does
not include a private residence in which a related family member is required to
receive outpatient behavioral health services for substance abuse or addiction
treatment as a condition of continuing to reside in the family dwelling. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Title 9, chapter 4, article 8, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 9-500.41, to read:

START_STATUTE9-500.41.  911
telephone calls; medical assistance requests; Good Samaritans

A
city or town that receives 911 telephone calls shall report to the department
of health services, in a format prescribed by the department, the number of
telephone calls received under section 13‑3423 and any related overdose
deaths.END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Section 11-269.18, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE11-269.18.  Structured
sober living homes; standards; definitions

A.  A
county may adopt by ordinance standards for structured sober living homes that
comply with state and federal fair housing laws and the Americans with
disabilities act.  If adopted, the standards for structured sober
living homes may include:

1.  A
written notification from all structured sober living homes that includes:

(a)  The
name and address of the structured sober living home.

(b)  The
following information regarding the property:

(i)  The
property owner's name, address and contact telephone number.

(ii)  If
the property is leased, a copy of the lease that states that the property will
be used as a structured sober living home.

2.  Supervision
requirements in the structured sober living home for the residents during all
hours of operation.

3.  The
establishment and maintenance of an operation plan that facilitates the
rehabilitative process, including discharge planning, and that addresses the
maintenance of the property and noise abatement consistent with local
ordinances.

B.  A county that adopts standards for structured sober
living homes pursuant to subsection A of this section:

1.  shall
require structured sober living homes to develop policies and procedures to
allow individuals on medication-assisted treatment to continue to receive this
treatment while living in the structured sober living home.

2.  May exclude from regulation any
structured sober living home that is subject to adequate oversight by another
governmental entity or contractor.

C.  For the purposes of this section: , 

1.  "Medication‑assisted
treatment" has the same meaning prescribed in section 32‑3201.01.

2.  "Structured sober living
home":

1.  (a)  Means
any premises, place or building that provides alcohol‑free or drug‑free
housing, promotes independent living and life skill development and provides
structured activities that are directed primarily toward recovery from
substance use disorders in a supervised setting to a group of unrelated
individuals who are recovering from drug or alcohol addiction and who are
receiving outpatient behavioral health services for substance abuse or
addiction treatment while living in the home.

2.  (b)  Does
not include a private residence in which a related family member is required to
receive outpatient behavioral health services for substance abuse or addiction
treatment as a condition of continuing to reside in the family dwelling. END_STATUTE

Sec. 4.  Title 11, chapter 2, article 4, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding sections 11-269.20 and 11‑269.21,
to read:

START_STATUTE11-269.20.  Drug
and paraphernalia drop-off locations; referral

On
or before December 31, 2018, the board of supervisors from each county shall
establish at least one location in the county where a person may drop off any
legal or illegal drug or substance and drug paraphernalia and receive a
referral to a substance abuse treatment facility.  END_STATUTE

START_STATUTE11-269.21.  911
telephone calls; medical assistance requests; Good Samaritans

A
county that receives 911 telephone calls shall report to the department of
health services, in a format prescribed by the department, the number of
telephone calls received under section 13‑3423 and any related overdose
deaths. END_STATUTE

Sec. 5.  Section 13-2310, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE13-2310.  Fraudulent
schemes and artifices; classification; definition

A.  Any
person who, pursuant to a scheme or artifice to defraud, knowingly obtains any
benefit by means of false or fraudulent pretenses, representations, promises or
material omissions is guilty of a class 2 felony.

B.  Reliance
on the part of any person shall not be a necessary element of the offense
described in subsection A of this section.

C.  A
person who is convicted of a violation of this section that involved a benefit
with a value of one hundred thousand dollars or more or the
manufacture, sale or marketing of opioids is not eligible for suspension
of sentence, probation, pardon or release from confinement on any basis except
pursuant to section 31‑233, subsection A or B until the sentence imposed
by the court has been served, the person is eligible for release pursuant to
section 41‑1604.07 or the sentence is commuted.

D.  The This state shall apply the aggregation
prescribed by section 13‑1801, subsection B to violations of this section
in determining the applicable punishment.

E.  As used in For the purposes of this
section, "scheme or artifice to defraud" includes a scheme or
artifice to deprive a person of the intangible right of honest services. END_STATUTE

Sec. 6.  Title 13, chapter 34, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended by adding section 13-3423, to read:

START_STATUTE13-3423.  Medical
assistance requests; prohibited prosecution of Good Samaritans; mitigating
factor; definitions

A.  A person who, in
good faith, seeks medical assistance for someone experiencing a
drug-related overdose may not be charged or prosecuted for the possession or
use of a controlled substance or drug paraphernalia or a preparatory offense if
the evidence for the violation was gained as a result of the person's seeking
medical assistance.

B.  A
person who experiences a drug-related overdose, who is in need of medical
assistance and for whom medical assistance is sought pursuant to subsection A
of this section may not be charged or prosecuted for the possession or use of a
controlled substance or drug paraphernalia if the evidence for the violation
was gained as a result of the person's overdose and need for medical
assistance.

C.  The
act of seeking medical assistance for someone who is experiencing a
drug-related overdose may be used as a mitigating factor in a criminal
prosecution for a violation of this chapter. 

D.  This
section does not limit either:

1.  The
admissibility of any evidence in connection with the investigation or
prosecution of a crime with regard to a defendant who does not qualify under
subsection A or B of this section or with regard to any other crime.

2.  The
ability to seize contraband or make an arrest for any other offense.

E.  This
section does not prohibit a person specified in subsection A or B of this
section from being offered a diversion program for an offense other than the
possession or use of a controlled substance or drug paraphernalia or a
preparatory offense.

F.  For
the purposes of this section:

1.  "Medical
assistance" means aid provided by a health care professional who is
licensed, registered or certified in this state, who is acting within the
health care professional's scope of practice and who provides a diagnosis,
treatment or other medical service.

2.  "Seeks
medical assistance" means to call 911 or otherwise contact law
enforcement, poison control or a hospital emergency department. END_STATUTE

Sec. 7.  Repeal

Section
13-3423, Arizona Revised Statutes, as added by this
act, is repealed from and after June 30, 2023.

Sec. 8.  Title 15, chapter 13, article 9, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 15-1756, to read:

START_STATUTE15-1756.  Medical
programs; students; required opioid-related clinical education

A
student who is enrolled in a public or private medical program in this state
and whose intended degree may make the student eligible for a United States
drug enforcement administration registration shall take at least three hours of
opioid-related clinical education. END_STATUTE

Sec. 9.  Title 20, Arizona Revised Statutes, is
amended by adding chapter 26, to read:

CHAPTER
26

PRIOR
AUTHORIZATION FOR CERTAIN HEALTH CARE SERVICES

ARTICLE
1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS

START_STATUTE20-3401.  Definitions

In
this article, unless the context otherwise requires:

1.  "Adverse
determination":

(a)  Means
a decision by a health care services plan or its utilization review agent that
the health care services furnished or proposed to be furnished to an enrollee
are not medically necessary and plan coverage is therefore denied, reduced or
terminated.

(b)  Does
not include a decision to deny, reduce or terminate services that are not
covered for reasons other than medical necessity.

2.  "Authorization":

(a)  Means
a determination by a health care services plan or its utilization review agent
that a health care service has been reviewed and, based on the information
provided, satisfies the health care services plan's requirements for medical
necessity and appropriateness and that payment under the plan will be made for
that health care service.

(b)  Does
not include any different or additional procedures, services or treatments
beyond those specifically reviewed and approved by the health care services plan.

3.  "Emergency
ambulance services" has the same meaning prescribed in section 20‑2801.

4.  "Emergency
services" has the same meaning prescribed in section 20‑2801.

5.  "Enrollee"
means an individual or a dependent of that individual who is currently enrolled
with and covered by a health care services plan. Enrollee includes an
enrollee's legally authorized representative.

6.  "Health
care service":

(a)  Means
a health care procedure, treatment or service for the diagnosis, management or
treatment of acute pain, chronic pain or opioid use disorder.

(b)  Includes
the provision of a prescription drug, device or durable medical equipment for
the treatment or management of acute pain, chronic pain or opioid use disorder.

(c)  Does
not include treatments that are experimental, investigational or off label.

7.  "Health
care services plan":

(a)  Means
a plan offered by a disability insurer, group disability insurer, blanket
disability insurer, health care services organization, hospital service
corporation or medical service corporation that contractually agrees to pay or
make reimbursements for health care services expenses for one or more
individuals residing in this state.

(b)  Does
not include benefits provided under limited benefit coverage as defined in section
20‑1137.

8.  "Medically
necessary" or "medical necessity":

(a)  means
covered health care services provided by a licensed provider acting within the
provider's scope of practice in this state to prevent or treat disease,
disability or other adverse conditions or their progression or to prolong life.

(b)  Does
not include services that are experimental or investigational or prescriptions
that are prescribed off label.

9.  "Medication‑assisted
treatment" has the same meaning prescribed in section 32‑3201.01.

10.  "Prior
authorization requirement":

(a)  Means
a practice implemented by a health care services plan or its utilization review
agent in which coverage of a health care service is dependent on an enrollee or
a provider obtaining approval from the health care services plan before the
service is performed, received or prescribed, as applicable.

(b)  Includes
preadmission review, pretreatment review, prospective review or utilization
review procedures conducted by a health care services plan or its utilization
review agent before providing a health care service.

(c)  Does
not include case management or step therapy protocols.

11.  "Provider"
means a physician, health care institution or other person or entity that is
licensed or otherwise authorized to furnish health care services in this
state.  

12.  "Urgent
health care service" means a health care service with respect to which the
application of the time periods for making a nonexpedited prior authorization
decision, in the opinion of a provider with knowledge of the enrollee's medical
condition, could either:

(a)  Seriously
jeopardize the life or health of the enrollee or the ability of the enrollee to
regain maximum function.

(b)  Subject
the enrollee to severe pain that cannot be adequately managed without the care
or treatment that is the subject of the utilization review. 

13.  "Utilization
review agent" has the same meaning prescribed in section 20‑2501. END_STATUTE

START_STATUTE20-3402.  Prior
authorization; exceptions

A.  A
health care services plan or its utilization review agent may impose a prior
authorization requirement for health care services provided to an enrollee,
except for emergency ambulance services and emergency services as specified in
section 20‑2803, health care services arising after the initial medical
screening examination and immediately necessary stabilizing treatment as
specified in section 20‑2803.

B.  A
health care services plan must allow at least one modality of medication‑assisted
treatment to be available without prior authorization. END_STATUTE

START_STATUTE20-3403.  Prior
authorization requirements; disclosures; access

A.  If a health care
services plan contains a prior authorization requirement, all of the following
apply: 

1.  The
health care services plan or its utilization review agent shall make available
to all providers on its website or provider portal a listing of all prior
authorization requirements. The listing shall clearly identify the specific
health care services, drugs or devices to which a prior authorization
requirement exists, including specific information or documentation that a provider
must submit in order for the prior authorization request to be considered
complete. 

2.  The
health care services plan or its utilization review agent shall allow providers
to access the prior authorization request form through the applicable electronic
software system. 

3.  Beginning
January 1, 2020, the health care services plan or its utilization review agent
shall accept prior authorization requests through a secure electronic
transmission.

4.  The
health care services plan or its utilization review agent shall provide at
least two forms of access to request a prior authorization including telephone,
fax or electronic means and shall have emergency after‑hours procedures.

B.  Beginning
January 1, 2020, the health care services plan or its utilization review agent
shall accept and respond to prior authorization requests for prescription
benefits through a secure electronic transmission.

C.  Beginning
January 1, 2020, the health care services plan or its utilization review agent
may enter into a contractual arrangement with a provider under which the plan
agrees to process and respond to prior authorization requests that are not
submitted electronically because of the financial hardship that electronic
submission of prior authorization requests would create for the provider or
because internet connectivity is limited or unavailable where the provider is
located.END_STATUTE

START_STATUTE20-3404.  Prior
authorization requirement timelines

A.  If a plan offered by
a health care services plan contains a prior authorization requirement, all of
the following apply:

1.  For
prior authorization requests concerning urgent health care services, the health
care services plan or its utilization review agent shall notify the provider of
the prior authorization or adverse determination not later than five days after
the receipt of all necessary information to support the prior authorization
request.

2.  For
prior authorization requests concerning health care services that are not
urgent health care services, the health care services plan or its utilization
review agent shall notify the provider of the prior authorization or adverse
determination not later than fourteen days after receipt of all necessary
information to support the prior authorization request.

3.  On
receipt of information from the provider in support of a prior authorization
request, the health care services plan or its utilization review agent shall
provide a receipt in the same format that the request was made to the provider
acknowledging that the information was received, unless the
necessary return contact information is not provided.

B.  The
notification required under subsection A of this section shall state whether
the prior authorization request is approved, denied or incomplete.  If the
prior authorization request is denied, the health care services plan or its
utilization review agent shall state the specific reason for the denial.  For a
request that is considered incomplete, the provider shall have the opportunity
to submit additional information.  Once the provider submits additional
information on incomplete requests, the health care services plan has five days
to review and respond to requests for health care services deemed urgent and
fourteen days to review and respond to requests for health care services deemed
not urgent.

C.  A
prior authorization request is deemed granted if a health care services plan or
its utilization review agent fails to comply with the deadlines and
notification requirements of this section.

D.  A
prior authorization request, once granted or deemed granted, is binding on the
health care services plan, may be relied on by the enrollee and provider and
may not be rescinded or modified by a health care services plan or its
utilization review agent after the provider renders the authorized health care
services in good faith and pursuant to the authorization unless there is
evidence of fraud or misrepresentation by the provider.

E.  On
a denial of a prior authorization request, the enrollee and the provider may
exercise the review and appeal rights specified in chapter 15, article 2 of
this title. END_STATUTE

START_STATUTE20-3405.  Prior
authorization of prescription drugs for chronic pain conditions

A.  For
a prior authorization request related to a chronic pain condition, the health
care services plan or its utilization review agent shall honor a prior
authorization that is granted for an approved prescription drug for the
earliest of the following: 

1.  Six
months after the date of the prior authorization approval.

2.  The
last day of the enrollee's coverage under the plan. 

B.  In
relation to a prior authorization described in subsection A of this section,
the health care services plan or its utilization review agent may request that
the provider submit information to the health care services plan or its
utilization review agent indicating that the enrollee's chronic pain condition
has not changed and that the continuation of the treatment is not negatively
impacting the enrollee's health.  If the provider does not respond
within five business days after the date on which the request was received, the
health care services plan or its utilization review agent may terminate the
prior authorization. 

C.  This
section does not apply to:

1.  Prescription
medications if the United States food and drug administration recommends that the
drug be used only for periods of less than six months.

2.  Any
opioid or benzodiazepine or other schedule I or II controlled substance.

D.  This
section does not prohibit the substitution of any drug that has received a six‑month
prior authorization under subsection A of this section when there is a release
of a United States food and drug administration‑approved comparable brand
product or a generic counterpart of a brand product that is listed as
therapeutically equivalent in the United States food and drug administration's
publication titled approved drug products with therapeutic equivalence
evaluations.

E.  This
section does not prohibit a health care services plan from granting a prior
authorization for a duration longer than six months. END_STATUTE

Sec. 10.  Section 32-854.01, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-854.01.  Unprofessional
conduct

Unprofessional
conduct includes the following conduct, whether it occurs in this state or
elsewhere:

1.  Requesting,
listing, accepting or receiving any rebate or commission for prescribing or
recommending any footwear, drug, medicine, or other article to the licensee's
patients.

2.  Prescribing,
dispensing or pretending to use, in treating any patient, any secret remedial
agent, or manifesting or promoting its use in any way, or guaranteeing or
implying to guarantee any treatment, therapy or remedy.

3.  Representing
that a disease or infirmity can be permanently cured, or that any disease, ailments ailment or infirmities
infirmity can be cured by a secret
method, procedure, treatment, medicine or devices device, if this is not true.

4.  Practicing
podiatry under a trade name, under the name of another podiatrist, under any
other name than that which appears on the practitioner's license, or under any
title that misrepresents the practice of podiatry.

5.  Advertising
in a false, deceptive or misleading manner or advertising the quality of
podiatric service.

6.  Employing
a solicitor to obtain business.

7.  Fee
splitting under any guise whatsoever.

8.  Failing
to report as required in section 32‑852.01, subsection A.

9.  Failing
to obtain written informed consent from a patient before the licensee performs
any surgical procedure on the patient.

10.  Committing
a felony, whether or not involving moral turpitude, or a misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude.  In either case, conviction by any court of competent
jurisdiction is conclusive evidence that the licensee committed the crime.

11.  Failing
or refusing to maintain adequate records on a patient for at least seven years
or failing or refusing to make the records available to a physician or another
podiatrist within twenty‑one days after request and receipt of proper
authorization.

12.  Habitual
intemperance in the use of alcohol or habitual substance abuse.

13.  Use of Using controlled substances or
prescription‑only drugs except if provided by a physician for use during
a prescribed lawful course of treatment.

14.  Prescribing
controlled substances to members of the podiatrist's immediate family.

15.  Providing
any controlled substance or prescription‑only drug for other than
accepted therapeutic purposes.

16.  Dispensing
a schedule II controlled substance that is an opioid.

16.  17.  Committing
gross malpractice, repeated malpractice or any malpractice resulting in
the death of a patient.

17.  18.  Refusing to divulge to
the board on demand the means, method, procedure, modality of treatment or
medicine used in the treatment of a disease, injury, ailment or infirmity.

18.  19.  Violating any federal
or state law applicable to the practice of podiatry.

19.  20.  Having the
refusal, revocation or suspension of a licensee's
license refused, revoked or suspended by any other
licensing jurisdiction for inability to safely and skillfully practice podiatry
or for unprofessional conduct as defined by that jurisdiction that directly or
indirectly corresponds to any act of unprofessional conduct as prescribed by
this section or any act under section 32‑852.

20.  21.  Committing
any conduct or practice that is or might be harmful or dangerous to the
health of the patient.

21.  22.  Violating any formal
order, probation or stipulation issued by the board pursuant to this chapter.

22.  23.  Violating or
attempting to violate, directly or indirectly, or assisting in or abetting the
violation of or conspiring to violate any provision of this chapter.

23.  24.  Charging or collecting
a clearly excessive fee.  In determining the reasonableness of a fee,
the fee customarily charged in the locality for similar services shall be
considered in light of modifying factors, such as the time required, the
complexity of the service and the skill requisite to perform the service
properly.  This paragraph does not apply if there is a clear written contract
for a fixed fee between the podiatrist and the patient that has been entered
into before the licensee provides the service.

24.  25.  Obtaining a fee by
fraud, deceit or misrepresentation.

25.  26.  Charging a fee for
services not rendered.

26.  27.  Failing to dispense
drugs and devices in compliance with article 4 of this chapter. END_STATUTE

Sec. 11.  Section 32-871, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-871.  Dispensing
of drugs and devices; conditions; civil penalty; definition

A.  A
podiatrist may dispense drugs, except schedule II controlled substances
that are opioids, and devices kept by the podiatrist if:

1.  All
drugs are dispensed in packages labeled with the following information:

(a)  The
dispensing podiatrist's name, address and telephone number.

(b)  The
date the drug is dispensed.

(c)  The
patient's name.

(d)  The
name and strength of the drug, directions for its use and any cautionary
statements.

2.  The
dispensing podiatrist enters into the patient's medical record the name and
strength of the drug dispensed, the date the drug is dispensed and the
therapeutic reason.

3.  The
dispensing podiatrist keeps all drugs in a locked cabinet or room, controls
access to the cabinet or room by a written procedure and maintains an ongoing
inventory of its contents.

B.  Except
in an emergency situation, a podiatrist who dispenses drugs for a profit
without being registered by the board to do so is subject to a civil penalty by
the board of not less than three hundred dollars and not more than one thousand
dollars for each transaction and is prohibited from further dispensing for a
period of time as prescribed by the board.

C.  Prior to Before dispensing a drug pursuant
to this section, the patient shall be given a written
prescription on which appears the following statement in bold type:  "This
prescription may be filled by the prescribing podiatrist or by a pharmacy of
your choice."

D.  A
podiatrist shall dispense for profit only to his the podiatrist's own patient and only for conditions being
treated by that podiatrist.  The podiatrist shall provide direct
supervision of a nurse or attendant involved in the dispensing
process.  In For the purposes of this
subsection, "direct supervision" means that a podiatrist is present
and makes the determination as to the legitimacy or the advisability of the drugs
or devices to be dispensed.

E.  This
section shall be enforced by the board, which shall
establish rules regarding labeling, record keeping recordkeeping, storage and packaging of drugs that are
consistent with the requirements of chapter 18 of this title.  The
board may conduct periodic inspections of dispensing practices to assure ensure compliance with this section
and applicable rules.

F.  For
the purposes of this section, "dispense" means the delivery by a
podiatrist of a prescription drug or device to a patient, except for samples
packaged for individual use by licensed manufacturers or repackagers of drugs,
and includes the prescribing, administering, packaging, labeling and security
necessary to prepare and safeguard the drug or device for delivery. END_STATUTE

Sec. 12.  Section 32-1201.01, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-1201.01.  Definition
of unprofessional conduct

For the
purposes of this chapter, "unprofessional conduct" means the
following acts, whether occurring in this state or elsewhere:

1.  Intentional betrayal of Intentionally betraying a
professional confidence or intentional violation of intentionally violating a privileged communication except as
either of these may otherwise be required by law.  This paragraph
does not prevent members of the board from the full and free exchange of
information with the licensing and disciplinary boards of other states,
territories or districts of the United States or foreign countries, with the
Arizona state dental association or any of its component societies or with the
dental societies of other states, counties, districts, territories or foreign
countries.

2.  Using
controlled substances as defined in section 36‑2501, narcotic drugs,
dangerous drugs or marijuana as defined in section 13‑3401, or hypnotic
drugs, including acetylurea derivatives, barbituric acid derivatives, chloral,
paraldehyde, phenylhydantoin derivatives, sulfonmethane derivatives or any
compounds, mixtures or preparations that may be used for producing hypnotic
effects, or alcohol to the extent that it affects the ability of the dentist,
denturist or dental hygienist to practice that person's profession.

3.  Prescribing,
dispensing or using drugs for other than accepted dental therapeutic purposes
or for other than medically indicated supportive therapy in conjunction with
managing a patient's dental needs.

4.  Committing gross malpractice or repeated acts constituting
malpractice.

5.  Acting
or assuming to act as a member of the board if this is not true.

6.  Procuring
or attempting to procure a certificate of the national board of dental
examiners or a license to practice dentistry or dental hygiene by fraud or
misrepresentation or by knowingly taking advantage of the mistake of another.

7.  Having
professional connection with or lending one's name to an illegal practitioner
of dentistry or any of the other healing arts.

8.  Representing
that a manifestly not correctable condition, disease, injury, ailment or
infirmity can be permanently corrected, or that a correctable condition,
disease, injury, ailment or infirmity can be corrected within a stated time, if
this is not true.

9.  Offering,
undertaking or agreeing to correct, cure or treat a condition, disease, injury,
ailment or infirmity by a secret means, method, device or instrumentality.

10.  Refusing
to divulge to the board, on reasonable notice and demand, the means, method,
device or instrumentality used in the treatment of a condition, disease,
injury, ailment or infirmity.

11.  Dividing
a professional fee or offering, providing or receiving any consideration for
patient referrals among or between dental care providers or dental care
institutions or entities.  This paragraph does not prohibit the division of
fees among licensees who are engaged in a bona fide employment, partnership,
corporate or contractual relationship for the delivery of professional
services.

12.  Knowingly
making any false or fraudulent statement, written or oral, in connection with
the practice of dentistry.

13.  Refusal, revocation or suspension of Having a
license refused, revoked or suspended or any other
disciplinary action taken against a dentist by, or the voluntary
surrender of voluntarily surrendering a license in
lieu of disciplinary action to, any other state, territory, district or country,
unless the board finds that this action was not taken for reasons that relate
to the person's ability to safely and skillfully practice dentistry or to any
act of unprofessional conduct.

14.  Committing any conduct or practice that constitutes a danger to
the health, welfare or safety of the patient or the public.

15.  Obtaining
a fee by fraud or misrepresentation, or wilfully or intentionally filing a
fraudulent claim with a third party for services rendered or to be rendered to
a patient.

16.  Committing repeated irregularities in billing.

17.  Employing
unlicensed persons to perform or aiding and abetting unlicensed persons in the
performance of work that can be done legally only by licensed persons.

18.  Practicing
dentistry under a false or assumed name in this state, other than as allowed by
section 32‑1262.

19.  Wilfully
or intentionally causing or permitting supervised personnel or auxiliary
personnel operating under the licensee's supervision to commit illegal acts or
perform an act or operation other than that permitted under article 4 of this
chapter and rules adopted by the board pursuant to section 32‑1282.

20.  Committing the following advertising practices:

(a)  The publication Publishing or circulation Circulating, directly or
indirectly, of any false, fraudulent or misleading
statements concerning the skill, methods or practices of the licensee or of any
other person.

(b)  Advertising
in any manner that tends to deceive or defraud the public.

21.  Failing
to dispense drugs and devices in compliance with article 6 of this chapter.

22.  Failing
to comply with a board order, including an order of censure or probation.

23.  Failing
to comply with a board subpoena in a timely manner.

24.  Failing
or refusing to maintain adequate patient records.

25.  Failing
to allow properly authorized board personnel, on demand, to inspect the place
of practice and examine and have access to documents, books, reports and
records maintained by the licensee or certificate holder that relate to the
dental practice or dental-related activity.

26.  Refusing
to submit to a body fluid examination as required through a monitored treatment
program or pursuant to a board investigation into a licensee's or certificate
holder's alleged substance abuse.

27.  Failing
to inform a patient of the type of material the dentist will use in the
patient's dental filling and the reason why the dentist is using that
particular filling.

28.  Failing
to report in writing to the board any evidence that a dentist, denturist or
dental hygienist is or may be:

(a)  Professionally
incompetent.

(b)  Engaging
in unprofessional conduct.

(c)  Impaired
by drugs or alcohol.

(d)  Mentally
or physically unable to safely engage in the activities of a dentist, denturist
or dental hygienist pursuant to this chapter.

29.  Filing
a false report pursuant to paragraph 28 of this section.

30.  Practicing
dentistry, dental hygiene or denturism in a business entity that is not
registered with the board as required by section 32‑1213.

31.  Dispensing
a schedule II controlled substance that is an opioid. END_STATUTE

Sec. 13.  Section 32-1298, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-1298.  Dispensing
of drugs and devices; conditions; civil penalty; definition

A.  A
dentist may dispense drugs, except schedule II controlled
substances that are opioids, and devices kept by the dentist if:

1.  All
drugs are dispensed in packages labeled with the following information:

(a)  The
dispensing dentist's name, address and telephone number.

(b)  The
date the drug is dispensed.

(c)  The
patient's name.

(d)  The
name and strength of the drug, directions for its use and any cautionary
statements.

2.  The
dispensing dentist enters into the patient's medical dental record the name and strength of the drug dispensed, the
date the drug is dispensed and the therapeutic reason.

3.  The
dispensing dentist keeps all drugs in a locked cabinet or room, controls access
to the cabinet or room by a written procedure and maintains an ongoing
inventory of its contents.

B.  Except
in an emergency situation, a dentist who dispenses drugs for a profit without
being registered by the board to do so is subject to a civil penalty by the
board of not less than three hundred dollars and not more than one thousand
dollars for each transaction and is prohibited from further dispensing for a
period of time as prescribed by the board.

C.  Prior to Before dispensing a drug pursuant
to this section, the patient shall be given a written
prescription on which appears the following statement in bold type:  "This
prescription may be filled by the prescribing dentist or by a pharmacy of your
choice."

D.  A
dentist shall dispense for profit only to his the dentist's own patient and only for conditions being treated
by that dentist.  The dentist shall provide direct supervision of an
attendant involved in the dispensing process.  In
For the purposes of this subsection, "direct
supervision" means that a dentist is present and makes the determination
as to the legitimacy or advisability of the drugs or devices to be dispensed.

E.  This
section shall be enforced by the board, which shall
establish rules regarding labeling, record keeping recordkeeping, storage and packaging of drugs that are
consistent with the requirements of chapter 18 of this title.  The
board may conduct periodic inspections of dispensing practices to assure ensure compliance with this section
and applicable rules.

F.  For
the purposes of this section, "dispense" means the delivery by a
dentist of a prescription drug or device to a patient, except for samples
packaged for individual use by licensed manufacturers or repackagers of drugs,
and includes the prescribing, administering, packaging, labeling and security
necessary to prepare and safeguard the drug or device for delivery. END_STATUTE

Sec. 14.  Section 32-1401, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-1401.  Definitions

In
this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:

1.  "Active
license" means a valid and existing license to practice medicine.

2.  "Adequate
records" means legible medical records, produced by hand or
electronically, containing, at a minimum, sufficient information to identify
the patient, support the diagnosis, justify the treatment, accurately document
the results, indicate advice and cautionary warnings provided to the patient
and provide sufficient information for another practitioner to assume
continuity of the patient's care at any point in the course of treatment.

3.  "Advisory
letter" means a nondisciplinary letter to notify a licensee that either:

(a)  While
there is insufficient evidence to support disciplinary action, the board
believes that continuation of the activities that led to the investigation may
result in further board action against the licensee.

(b)  The
violation is a minor or technical violation that is not of sufficient merit to
warrant disciplinary action.

(c)  While
the licensee has demonstrated substantial compliance through rehabilitation or
remediation that has mitigated the need for disciplinary action, the board
believes that repetition of the activities that led to the investigation may
result in further board action against the licensee.

4.  "Approved
hospital internship, residency or clinical fellowship program" means a
program at a hospital that at the time the training occurred was legally incorporated
and that had a program that was approved for internship, fellowship or
residency training by the accreditation council for graduate medical education,
the association of American medical colleges, the royal college of physicians
and surgeons of Canada or any similar body in the United States or Canada
approved by the board whose function is that of approving hospitals for
internship, fellowship or residency training.

5.  "Approved
school of medicine" means any school or college offering a course of study
that, on successful completion, results in the degree of doctor of medicine and
whose course of study has been approved or accredited by an educational or
professional association, recognized by the board, including the association of
American medical colleges, the association of Canadian medical colleges or the
American medical association.

6.  "Board"
means the Arizona medical board.

7.  "Completed
application" means that the applicant has supplied all required fees,
information and correspondence requested by the board on forms and in a manner
acceptable to the board.

8.  "Direct
supervision" means that a physician, physician assistant licensed pursuant
to chapter 25 of this title or nurse practitioner certified pursuant to chapter
15 of this title is within the same room or office suite as the medical
assistant in order to be available for consultation regarding those tasks the
medical assistant performs pursuant to section 32‑1456.

9.  "Dispense"
means the delivery by a doctor of medicine of a prescription drug or device to
a patient, except for samples packaged for individual use by licensed
manufacturers or repackagers of drugs, and includes the prescribing,
administering, packaging, labeling and security necessary to prepare and
safeguard the drug or device for delivery.

10.  "Doctor
of medicine" means a natural person holding a license, registration or
permit to practice medicine pursuant to this chapter.

11.  "Full‑time
faculty member" means a physician who is employed full time as a faculty
member while holding the academic position of assistant professor or a higher
position at an approved school of medicine.

12.  "Health
care institution" means any facility as defined in section 36‑401,
any person authorized to transact disability insurance, as defined in title 20,
chapter 6, article 4 or 5, any person who is issued a certificate of authority
pursuant to title 20, chapter 4, article 9 or any other partnership,
association or corporation that provides health care to consumers.

13.  "Immediate
family" means the spouse, natural or adopted children, father, mother,
brothers and sisters of the doctor and the natural or adopted children, father,
mother, brothers and sisters of the doctor's spouse.

14.  "Letter
of reprimand" means a disciplinary letter that is issued by the board and
that informs the physician that the physician's conduct violates state or
federal law and may require the board to monitor the physician.

15.  "Limit"
means taking a nondisciplinary action that alters the physician's practice or
professional activities if the board determines that there is evidence that the
physician is or may be mentally or physically unable to safely engage in the
practice of medicine.

16.  "Medical
assistant" means an unlicensed person who meets the requirements of
section 32‑1456, has completed an education program approved by the
board, assists in a medical practice under the supervision of a doctor of
medicine, physician assistant or nurse practitioner and performs delegated
procedures commensurate with the assistant's education and training but does
not diagnose, interpret, design or modify established treatment programs or
perform any functions that would violate any statute applicable to the practice
of medicine.

18.  17.  "Medically
incompetent" means a person who the board determines is incompetent based
on a variety of factors, including:

(a)  A
lack of sufficient medical knowledge or skills, or both, to a degree likely to
endanger the health of patients.

(b)  When
considered with other indications of medical incompetence, failing to obtain a
scaled score of at least seventy‑five percent on the written special
purpose licensing examination.

17.  18.  "Medical
peer review" means:

(a)  The participation
by a doctor of medicine in the review and evaluation of the medical management
of a patient and the use of resources for patient care.

(b)  Activities
relating to a health care institution's decision to grant or continue
privileges to practice at that institution.

19.  "Medicine"
means allopathic medicine as practiced by the recipient of a degree of doctor
of medicine.

20.  "Office
based surgery" means a medical procedure conducted in a physician's office
or other outpatient setting that is not part of a licensed hospital or licensed
ambulatory surgical center.

21.  "Physician"
means a doctor of medicine who is licensed pursuant to this chapter.

22.  "Practice
of medicine" means the diagnosis, the treatment or the correction of or
the attempt or the claim to be able to diagnose, treat or correct any and all
human diseases, injuries, ailments, infirmities or deformities, physical or
mental, real or imaginary, by any means, methods, devices or instrumentalities,
except as the same may be among the acts or persons not affected by this
chapter.  The practice of medicine includes the practice of medicine alone or
the practice of surgery alone, or both.

23.  "Restrict"
means taking a disciplinary action that alters the physician's practice or
professional activities if the board determines that there is evidence that the
physician is or may be medically incompetent or guilty of unprofessional
conduct.

24.  "Special
purpose licensing examination" means an examination that is developed by
the national board of medical examiners on behalf of the federation of state
medical boards for use by state licensing boards to test the basic medical
competence of physicians who are applying for licensure and who have been in
practice for a considerable period of time in another jurisdiction and to
determine the competence of a physician who is under investigation by a state
licensing board.

25.  "Teaching
hospital's accredited graduate medical education program" means that the
hospital is incorporated and has an internship, fellowship or residency
training program that is accredited by the accreditation council for graduate
medical education, the American medical association, the association of
American medical colleges, the royal college of physicians and surgeons of
Canada or a similar body in the United States or Canada that is approved by the
board and whose function is that of approving hospitals for internship,
fellowship or residency training.

26.  "Teaching
license" means a valid license to practice medicine as a full‑time
faculty member of an approved school of medicine or a teaching hospital's
accredited graduate medical education program.

27.  "Unprofessional
conduct" includes the following, whether occurring in this state or
elsewhere:

(a)  Violating
any federal or state laws, rules or regulations applicable to the practice of
medicine.

(b)  Intentionally
disclosing a professional secret or intentionally disclosing a privileged
communication except as either act may otherwise be required by law.

(c)  Committing false, fraudulent, deceptive or misleading advertising
by a doctor of medicine or the doctor's staff, employer or representative.

(d)  Committing
a felony, whether or not involving moral turpitude, or a misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude.  In either case, conviction by any court of competent
jurisdiction or a plea of no contest is conclusive evidence of the commission.

(e)  Failing
or refusing to maintain adequate records on a patient.

(f)  Exhibiting a pattern of using or being under the influence of
alcohol or drugs or a similar substance while practicing medicine or to the
extent that judgment may be impaired and the practice of medicine detrimentally
affected.

(g)  Using
controlled substances except if prescribed by another physician for use during
a prescribed course of treatment.

(h)  Prescribing
or dispensing controlled substances to members of the physician's immediate
family.

(i)  Prescribing,
dispensing or administering schedule II controlled substances as defined in
section 36‑2513, including amphetamines and similar
schedule II sympathomimetic drugs in the treatment of exogenous obesity for a
period in excess of thirty days in any one year, or the nontherapeutic use of
injectable amphetamines.

(j)  Prescribing,
dispensing or administering any controlled substance or prescription‑only
drug for other than accepted therapeutic purposes.

(k)  Dispensing
a schedule II controlled substance that is an opioid.

(k)  (l)  Signing
a blank, undated or predated prescription form.

(l)  (m)  Committing conduct that the board determines is gross
malpractice, repeated malpractice or any malpractice resulting in the death of
a patient.

(m)  (n)  Representing
that a manifestly incurable disease or infirmity can be permanently cured, or
that any disease, ailment or infirmity can be cured by a secret method,
procedure, treatment, medicine or device, if this is not true.

(n)  (o)  Refusing
to divulge to the board on demand the means, method, procedure, modality of
treatment or medicine used in the treatment of a disease, injury, ailment or
infirmity.

(o)  (p)  Having action that is taken against a
doctor of medicine by another licensing or regulatory jurisdiction due to that
doctor's mental or physical inability to engage safely in the practice of
medicine or the doctor's medical incompetence or for unprofessional conduct as
defined by that jurisdiction and that corresponds directly or indirectly to an
act of unprofessional conduct prescribed by this paragraph.  The action taken
may include refusing, denying, revoking or suspending a license by that
jurisdiction or a surrendering of a license to that jurisdiction, otherwise
limiting, restricting or monitoring a licensee by that jurisdiction or placing
a licensee on probation by that jurisdiction.

(p)  (q)  Having
sanctions imposed by an agency of the federal government, including
restricting, suspending, limiting or removing a person from the practice of
medicine or restricting that person's ability to obtain financial remuneration.

(q)  (r)  Committing any conduct or practice that is or might be harmful
or dangerous to the health of the patient or the public.

(r)  (s)  Violating
a formal order, probation, consent agreement or stipulation issued or entered
into by the board or its executive director under this chapter.

(s)  (t)  Violating
or attempting to violate, directly or indirectly, or assisting in or abetting
the violation of or conspiring to violate any provision of this chapter.

(t)  (u)  Knowingly
making any false or fraudulent statement, written or oral, in connection with
the practice of medicine or if applying for privileges or renewing an
application for privileges at a health care institution.

(u)  (v)  Charging
a fee for services not rendered or dividing a professional fee for patient
referrals among health care providers or health care institutions or between these
providers and institutions or a contractual arrangement that has the same
effect.  This subdivision does not apply to payments from a medical researcher
to a physician in connection with identifying and monitoring patients for a
clinical trial regulated by the United States food and drug administration.

(v)  (w)  Obtaining
a fee by fraud, deceit or misrepresentation.

(w)  (x)  Charging
or collecting a clearly excessive fee.  In determining whether a fee
is clearly excessive, the board shall consider the fee or range of fees
customarily charged in this state for similar services in light of modifying
factors such as the time required, the complexity of the service and the skill
requisite to perform the service properly.  This subdivision does not apply if
there is a clear written contract for a fixed fee between the physician and the
patient that has been entered into before the provision of the service.

(x)  (y)  Committing conduct that is in violation of section 36‑2302.

(y)  (z)  The use of Using experimental forms of
diagnosis and treatment without adequate informed patient consent, and without
conforming to generally accepted experimental criteria, including protocols,
detailed records, periodic analysis of results and periodic review by a medical
peer review committee as approved by the United States food and drug
administration or its successor agency.

(z)  (aa)  Engaging
in sexual conduct with a current patient or with a former patient within six
months after the last medical consultation unless the patient was the
licensee's spouse at the time of the contact or, immediately preceding the
physician‑patient relationship, was in a dating or engagement
relationship with the licensee.  For the purposes of this subdivision,
"sexual conduct" includes:

(i)  Engaging
in or soliciting sexual relationships, whether consensual or nonconsensual.

(ii)  Making
sexual advances, requesting sexual favors or engaging in any other verbal
conduct or physical contact of a sexual nature.

(iii)  Intentionally
viewing a completely or partially disrobed patient in the course of treatment
if the viewing is not related to patient diagnosis or treatment under current
practice standards.

(aa)  (bb)  Procuring
or attempting to procure a license to practice medicine or a license renewal by
fraud, by misrepresentation or by knowingly taking advantage of the mistake of
another person or an agency.

(bb)  (cc)  Representing
or claiming to be a medical specialist if this is not true.

(cc)  (dd)  Maintaining
a professional connection with or lending one's name to enhance or continue the
activities of an illegal practitioner of medicine.

(dd)  (ee)  Failing
to furnish information in a timely manner to the board or the board's
investigators or representatives if legally requested by the board.

(ee)  (ff)  Failing
to allow properly authorized board personnel on demand to examine and have
access to documents, reports and records maintained by the physician that
relate to the physician's medical practice or medically related activities.

(ff)  (gg)  Knowingly
failing to disclose to a patient on a form that is prescribed by the board and
that is dated and signed by the patient or guardian acknowledging that the
patient or guardian has read and understands that the doctor has a direct financial
interest in a separate diagnostic or treatment agency or in nonroutine goods or
services that the patient is being prescribed if the prescribed treatment,
goods or services are available on a competitive basis.  This subdivision does
not apply to a referral by one doctor of medicine to another doctor of medicine
within a group of doctors of medicine practicing together.

(gg)  (hh)  Using
chelation therapy in the treatment of arteriosclerosis or as any other form of
therapy, with the exception of treatment of heavy metal poisoning, without:

(i)  Adequate
informed patient consent.

(ii)  Conforming
to generally accepted experimental criteria, including protocols, detailed
records, periodic analysis of results and periodic review by a medical peer
review committee.

(iii)  Approval
by the United States food and drug administration or its successor agency.

(hh)  (ii)  Prescribing,
dispensing or administering anabolic‑androgenic steroids to a person for
other than therapeutic purposes.

(ii)  (jj)  Exhibiting a lack of or inappropriate direction, collaboration
or direct supervision of a medical assistant or a licensed, certified or
registered health care provider employed by, supervised by or assigned to the
physician.

(jj)  (kk)  Knowingly
making a false or misleading statement to the board or on a form required by
the board or in a written correspondence, including attachments, with the
board.

(kk)  (ll)  Failing
to dispense drugs and devices in compliance with article 6 of this chapter.

(ll)  (mm)  Committing conduct that the board determines is gross
negligence, repeated negligence or negligence resulting in harm to or the death
of a patient.

(mm)  (nn)  The Making a representation by a doctor of
medicine or the doctor's staff, employer or representative that the doctor is
boarded or board certified if this is not true or the standing is not current
or without supplying the full name of the specific agency, organization or
entity granting this standing.

(nn)  (oo)  Refusing
to submit to a body fluid examination or any other examination known to detect
the presence of alcohol or other drugs as required by the board pursuant to
section 32‑1452 or pursuant to a board investigation into a doctor of
medicine's alleged substance abuse.

(oo)  (pp)  Failing
to report in writing to the Arizona medical board or the Arizona regulatory
board of physician assistants any evidence that a doctor of medicine or a
physician assistant is or may be medically incompetent, guilty of
unprofessional conduct or mentally or physically unable to safely practice
medicine or to perform as a physician assistant.

(pp)  (qq)  The failure of As a physician who is the
chief executive officer, the medical director or the medical chief of staff of
a health care institution, failing to
report in writing to the board that the hospital privileges of a doctor of
medicine have been denied, revoked, suspended, supervised or limited because of
actions by the doctor that appear to show that the doctor is or may be
medically incompetent, is or may be guilty of unprofessional conduct or is or
may be unable to engage safely in the practice of medicine.

(qq)  (rr)  Claiming
to be a current member of the board or its staff or a board medical consultant
if this is not true.

(rr)  (ss)  Failing
to make patient medical records in the physician's possession promptly
available to a physician assistant, a nurse practitioner, a person licensed
pursuant to this chapter or a podiatrist, chiropractor, naturopathic physician,
osteopathic physician or homeopathic physician licensed under chapter 7, 8, 14,
17 or 29 of this title on receipt of proper authorization to do so from the
patient, a minor patient's parent, the patient's legal guardian or the
patient's authorized representative or failing to comply with title 12, chapter
13, article 7.1.

(ss)  (tt)  Prescribing,
dispensing or furnishing a prescription medication or a prescription‑only
device as defined in section 32‑1901 to a person unless the licensee
first conducts a physical or mental health status examination of that person or
has previously established a doctor‑patient relationship.  The
physical or mental health status examination may be conducted during a
real-time telemedicine encounter with audio and video capability, unless the
examination is for the purpose of obtaining a written certification from the
physician for the purposes of title 36, chapter 28.1. This subdivision does not
apply to:

(i)  A
physician who provides temporary patient supervision on behalf of the patient's
regular treating licensed health care professional or provides a consultation
requested by the patient's regular treating licensed health care professional.

(ii)  Emergency
medical situations as defined in section 41‑1831.

(iii)  Prescriptions
written to prepare a patient for a medical examination.

(iv)  Prescriptions
written or prescription medications issued for use by a county or tribal public
health department for immunization programs or emergency treatment or in
response to an infectious disease investigation, public health emergency,
infectious disease outbreak or act of bioterrorism.  For the purposes
of this item, "bioterrorism" has the same meaning prescribed in
section 36‑781.

(v)  Prescriptions
written or antimicrobials dispensed to a contact as defined in section 36‑661
who is believed to have had significant exposure risk as defined in section 36‑661
with another person who has been diagnosed with a communicable disease as
defined in section 36‑661 by the prescribing or dispensing physician. 

(vi)  Prescriptions
written or prescription medications issued for administration of immunizations
or vaccines listed in the United States centers for disease control and
prevention's recommended immunization schedule to a household member of a
patient.

(vii)  Prescriptions
for epinephrine auto-injectors written or dispensed for a school district or
charter school to be stocked for emergency use pursuant to section 15‑157
or for an authorized entity to be stocked pursuant to section 36‑2226.01.

(viii)  Prescriptions
written by a licensee through a telemedicine program that is covered by the
policies and procedures adopted by the administrator of a hospital or
outpatient treatment center.

(ix)  Prescriptions
for naloxone hydrochloride or any other opioid antagonist approved by the
United States food and drug administration that are written or dispensed for
use pursuant to section 36‑2228 or 36‑2266.

(tt)  (uu)  Performing
office based surgery using sedation in violation of board rules.

(uu)  (vv)  Practicing
medicine under a false or assumed name in this state. END_STATUTE

Sec. 15.  Section 32-1451.04, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-1451.04.  Burden
of proof

Except for
disciplinary matters brought pursuant to section 32‑1401, paragraph 27,
subdivision (z) (aa),
the board has the burden of proof by clear and convincing evidence for
disciplinary matters brought pursuant to this chapter. END_STATUTE

Sec. 16.  Section 32-1491, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-1491.  Dispensing
of drugs and devices; exception; civil penalty; conditions; definition

A.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section, a doctor of
medicine may dispense drugs and devices kept by the doctor if:

1.  All
drugs are dispensed in packages labeled with the following information:

(a)  The
dispensing doctor's name, address and telephone number.

(b)  The
date the drug is dispensed.

(c)  The
patient's name.

(d)  The
name and strength of the drug, directions for its use and any cautionary
statements.

2.  The
dispensing doctor enters into the patient's medical record the name and
strength of the drug dispensed, the date the drug is dispensed and the
therapeutic reason.

3.  The
dispensing doctor keeps all drugs in a locked cabinet or room, controls access
to the cabinet or room by a written procedure and maintains an ongoing
inventory of its contents.

4.  The
doctor registers with the board to dispense drugs and devices and pays the
registration fee prescribed by section 32‑1436.

B.  A doctor of medicine may not dispense a
schedule II controlled substance that is an opioid, except for an opioid that
is for medication‑assisted treatment for substance use disorders.

B.  C.  Except
in an emergency situation, a doctor who dispenses drugs without being
registered by the board to do so is subject to a civil penalty by the board of
not less than three hundred dollars and not more than one thousand dollars for
each transaction and is prohibited from further dispensing for a period of time
as prescribed by the board.

C.  D.  Before
a physician dispenses a drug pursuant to this section,
the physician shall give the patient a prescription and inform the patient that
the prescription may be filled by the prescribing physician or by a pharmacy of
the patient's choice.

D.  E.  A
doctor shall dispense only to the doctor's own patient and only for conditions
being treated by that doctor.  The doctor shall provide direct
supervision of a medical assistant, nurse or attendant involved in the
dispensing process.  In For the
purposes of this subsection, "direct supervision" means that a
doctor is present and makes the determination as to the legitimacy or the
advisability of the drugs or devices to be dispensed.

E.  F.  This
section shall be enforced by the board, which shall establish rules regarding
labeling, record keeping recordkeeping,
storage and packaging of drugs that are consistent with the requirements of
chapter 18 of this title.  The board may conduct periodic reviews of
dispensing practices to assure ensure compliance
with this section and applicable rules.

F.  G.  For
the purposes of this section, "dispense" means the delivery by a
doctor of medicine of a prescription drug or device to a patient, except for
samples packaged for individual use by licensed manufacturers or repackagers of
drugs, and includes the prescribing, administering, packaging, labeling and security
necessary to prepare and safeguard the drug or device for delivery. END_STATUTE

Sec. 17.  Section 32-1606, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-1606.  Powers
and duties of board

A.  The
board may:

1.  Adopt
and revise rules necessary to carry into effect this chapter.

2.  Publish
advisory opinions regarding registered and practical nursing practice and
nursing education.

3.  Issue
limited licenses or certificates if it determines that an applicant or licensee
cannot function safely in a specific setting or within the full scope of
practice.

4.  Refer
criminal violations of this chapter to the appropriate law enforcement agency.

5.  Establish
a confidential program for the monitoring of licensees who are chemically
dependent and who enroll in rehabilitation programs that meet the criteria
established by the board.  The board may take further action if the
licensee refuses to enter into a stipulated agreement or fails to comply with
its terms.  In order to protect the public health and safety, the
confidentiality requirements of this paragraph do not apply if the licensee
does not comply with the stipulated agreement.

6.  On
the applicant's or regulated party's request, establish a payment schedule with
the applicant or regulated party.

7.  Provide
education regarding board functions.

8.  Collect
or assist in the collection of workforce data.

9.  Adopt
rules for conducting pilot programs consistent with public safety for
innovative applications in nursing practice, education and regulation.

10.  Grant
retirement status on request to retired nurses who are or were licensed under
this chapter, who have no open complaint or investigation pending against them
and who are not subject to discipline.

11.  Accept
and spend federal monies and private grants, gifts, contributions and devises
to assist in carrying out the purposes of this chapter.  These monies do not
revert to the state general fund at the end of the fiscal year.

B.  The
board shall:

1.  Approve
regulated training and educational programs that meet the requirements of this
chapter and rules adopted by the board.

2.  By
rule, establish approval and reapproval processes for nursing and nursing
assistant training programs that meet the requirements of this chapter and
board rules.

3.  Prepare
and maintain a list of approved nursing programs for the preparation of
registered and practical nurses whose graduates are eligible for licensing under
this chapter as registered nurses or as practical nurses if they satisfy the
other requirements of this chapter and board rules.

4.  Examine
qualified registered and practical nurse applicants.

5.  License
and renew the licenses of qualified registered and practical nurse applicants
and licensed nursing assistants who are not qualified to be licensed by the
executive director.

6.  Adopt
a seal, which the executive director shall keep.

7.  Keep
a record of all proceedings.

8.  For
proper cause, deny or rescind approval of a regulated training or educational
program for failure to comply with this chapter or the rules of the board.

9.  Adopt
rules for the approval of credential evaluation services that evaluate the
qualifications of applicants who graduated from an international nursing
program.

10.  Determine
and administer appropriate disciplinary action against all regulated parties
who are found guilty of violating this chapter or rules adopted by the board.

11.  Perform
functions necessary to carry out the requirements of nursing assistant and
nurse aide training and competency evaluation program as set forth in the
omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1987 (P.L. 100‑203; 101 Stat. 1330),
as amended by the medicare catastrophic coverage act of 1988 (P.L. 100‑360;
102 Stat. 683).  These functions shall include:

(a)  Testing
and registration of certified nursing assistants.

(b)  Testing
and licensing of licensed nursing assistants.

(c)  Maintaining
a list of board‑approved training programs.

(d)  Maintaining
a registry of nursing assistants for all certified nursing assistants and
licensed nursing assistants.

(e)  Assessing
fees.

12.  Adopt
rules establishing those acts that may be performed by a registered nurse
practitioner or certified nurse midwife, except that the board does not have
authority to decide scope of practice relating to abortion as defined in
section 36‑2151.

13.  Adopt
rules that prohibit registered nurse practitioners or certified nurse midwives
from dispensing a schedule II controlled substance that is an opioid, except
for an opioid that is for medication‑assisted treatment for substance use
disorders.

13.  14.  Adopt rules
establishing educational requirements for the certification of school nurses. 

14.  15.  Publish copies of
board rules and distribute these copies on request.

15.  16.  Require each applicant
for initial licensure or certification to submit a full set of fingerprints to
the board for the purpose of obtaining a state and federal criminal records
check pursuant to section 41‑1750 and Public Law 92‑544.  The
department of public safety may exchange this fingerprint data with the federal
bureau of investigation.

16.  17.  Except for a licensee
who has been convicted of a felony that has been designated a misdemeanor
pursuant to section 13‑604, revoke a license of a person, revoke the
multistate licensure privilege of a person pursuant to section 32‑1669 or
not issue a license or renewal to an applicant who has one or more felony
convictions and who has not received an absolute discharge from the sentences
for all felony convictions three or more years before the date of filing an
application pursuant to this chapter.

17.  18.  Establish standards
for approving and reapproving nurse practitioner and clinical nurse specialist
programs and provide for surveys of nurse practitioner and clinical nurse
specialist programs as it deems necessary.

18.  19.  Provide the licensing
authorities of health care institutions, facilities and homes any information
the board receives regarding practices that place a patient's health at risk.

19.  20.  Limit the multistate
licensure privilege of any person who holds or applies for a license in this
state pursuant to section 32‑1668.

20.  21.  Adopt rules to
establish competency standards for obtaining and maintaining a license.

21.  22.  Adopt rules for the
qualification and certification of clinical nurse specialists.

22.  23.  Adopt rules for
approval and reapproval of refresher courses for nurses who are not currently
practicing.

23.  24.  Maintain a list of
approved medication assistant training programs.

24.  25.  Test and certify
medication assistants.

25.  26.  Maintain a registry
and disciplinary record of medication assistants who are certified pursuant to
this chapter.

C.  The
board may conduct an investigation on receipt of information that indicates
that a person or regulated party may have violated this chapter or a rule
adopted pursuant to this chapter.  Following the investigation, the
board may take disciplinary action pursuant to this chapter.

D.  The
board may limit, revoke or suspend the privilege of a nurse to practice in this
state granted pursuant to section 32‑1668.

E.  Failure
to comply with any final order of the board, including an order of censure or
probation, is cause for suspension or revocation of a license or a certificate.

F.  The
president or a member of the board designated by the president may administer
oaths in transacting the business of the board.END_STATUTE

Sec. 18.  Section 32-1706, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-1706.  Use
of pharmaceutical agents

A.  A
licensee may prescribe, dispense and administer over‑the‑counter pharmaceuticals
and topical prescription pharmaceuticals subject to the pharmaceutical agent
classifications specified in section 32‑1728.

B.  Except
as provided in subsection C of this section, a licensee may prescribe, dispense
and administer the following oral prescription pharmaceuticals for the
treatment of diseases of the eye and its adnexa for any one patient for each
occurrence for a period of not more than the day limit recommended by the
manufacturer or the physicians' desk reference, unless otherwise specified in
this subsection, subject to the pharmaceutical agent classifications specified
in section 32‑1728:

1.  Anti‑infectives
classified as tetracycline and its derivatives, cephalosporins, penicillin and
its derivatives, macrolides, fluroquinolones and antivirals.

2.  Antihistamines.

3.  Nonsteroidal
anti‑inflammatory agents.

4.  Agents
for the treatment of angle-closure glaucoma, including carbonic anhydrase
inhibitors.

5.  Steroids
in an amount that does not exceed the amount packaged for a single course of
therapy of not more than seven days.

C.  A
licensee may not prescribe, dispense or administer an oral pharmaceutical
specified in subsection B of this section or a controlled substance as
specified in subsection D of this section to a person who is under six years of
age.

D.  A
licensee may prescribe, dispense and administer a schedule III controlled
substance only if it is an analgesic and may prescribe or
administer any controlled substance only if it is an analgesic that is
reclassified from schedule III to schedule II after January 1, 2014.

E.  A
licensee shall not prescribe, dispense or administer the following prescription
substances:

1.  An
oral antifungal.

2.  An
oral antimetabolite.

3.  An
oral immunosuppressive.

4.  A
substance administered intravenously.

5.  Except
as provided in subsection F of this section, substances administered by
injection.

6.  Except
as provided in subsection D of this section, a schedule I, II, IV or V
controlled substance.

F.  A
licensee may use epinephrine auto‑injectors to counteract an anaphylactic
reaction. END_STATUTE

Sec. 19.  Section 32-1743, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-1743.  Grounds
for censure, civil penalty, probation, suspension, revocation, denial or
renewal of license, certificate or registration

A.  After
notice and a hearing the board in its discretion may censure, impose a civil
penalty, prescribe probation, suspend or revoke the license of a doctor of
optometry or refuse to issue or renew a license, certificate or registration
for any of the following reasons:

1.  Conviction Being convicted of a felony or
any offense involving moral turpitude.

2.  Procuring
or attempting to procure a license to practice optometry or a certificate to
use pharmaceutical agents by fraud, deceit, misrepresentation or knowingly
taking advantage of the mistake of another person or agency.

3.  Committing conduct likely to deceive or defraud the public.

4.  Committing unprofessional conduct.

5.  Employment of Employing a solicitor to
solicit business or soliciting from house to house or person to person.

6.  Obtaining
a fee or compensation by fraud or misrepresentation.

7.  Employment of Employing a person to engage
in the practice of the profession of optometry who does not hold a license to
practice the profession of optometry in this state.

8.  Using
any device to evade or defeat the provisions of this chapter, such as a profit
sharing plan or partnership with a person not licensed to practice the
profession of optometry in this state.

9.  Committing the practice of the profession of optometry under a
false or assumed name.

10.  Violation of Violating any provision of this
chapter or any board order.

11.  Violation of Violating any of the rules
adopted by the board pursuant to this chapter.

12.  Any violation of Violating any statutes,
laws or rules regulating the practice of optometry in this state or any other
jurisdiction in the United States.

13.  Providing
any controlled substance or pharmaceutical agent that is not
authorized by this chapter or providing any controlled substance or
prescription‑only drug for other than accepted therapeutic purposes for
diagnosis and treatment of conditions of the human eye and its adnexa.

14.  Dispensing
a schedule II controlled substance that is an opioid.

14.  15.  Committing
gross malpractice or repeated acts constituting malpractice.

15.  16.  Failing to maintain or
submit records as required by this chapter.

B.  To
determine the appropriate disciplinary action pursuant to this section, the
board may consider any previous nondisciplinary and disciplinary actions
against a licensee. END_STATUTE

Sec. 20.  Section 32-1854, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-1854.  Definition
of unprofessional conduct

For
the purposes of this chapter, "unprofessional conduct" includes the
following acts, whether occurring in this state or elsewhere:

1.  Knowingly
betraying a professional secret or wilfully violating a privileged
communication except as either of these may otherwise be required by
law.  This paragraph does not prevent members of the board from
exchanging information with the licensing and disciplinary boards of other
states, territories or districts of the United States or with foreign countries
or with osteopathic medical organizations located in this state or in any state,
district or territory of this country or in any foreign country.

2.  Committing
a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.  In either case conviction
by any court of competent jurisdiction is conclusive evidence of the commission
of the offense.

3.  Practicing
medicine while under the influence of alcohol, a dangerous drug as defined in
section 13‑3401, narcotic or hypnotic drugs or any substance that impairs
or may impair the licensee's ability to safely and skillfully practice
medicine.

4.  Being
diagnosed by a physician licensed under this chapter or chapter 13 of this
title or a psychologist licensed under chapter 19.1 of this title as
excessively or illegally using alcohol or a controlled substance.

5.  Prescribing,
dispensing or administering controlled substances or prescription‑only
drugs for other than accepted therapeutic purposes.

6.  Engaging
in the practice of medicine in a manner that harms or may harm a patient or
that the board determines falls below the community standard.

7.  Impersonating
another physician.

8.  Acting
or assuming to act as a member of the board if this is not true.

9.  Procuring,
renewing or attempting to procure or renew a license to practice osteopathic
medicine by fraud or misrepresentation.

10.  Having
professional connection with or lending one's name to an illegal practitioner
of osteopathic medicine or any of the other healing arts.

11.  Representing
that a manifestly incurable disease, injury, ailment or infirmity can be
permanently cured or that a curable disease, injury, ailment or infirmity can
be cured within a stated time, if this is not true.

12.  Failing
to reasonably disclose and inform the patient or the patient's representative
of the method, device or instrumentality the licensee uses to treat the
patient's disease, injury, ailment or infirmity.

13.  Refusing
to divulge to the board on demand the means, method, device or instrumentality
used in the treatment of a disease, injury, ailment or infirmity.

14.  Charging
a fee for services not rendered or dividing a professional fee for patient
referrals.  This paragraph does not apply to payments from a medical researcher
to a physician in connection with identifying and monitoring patients for
clinical trial regulated by the United States food and drug administration.

15.  Knowingly
making any false or fraudulent statement, written or oral, in connection with
the practice of medicine or when applying for or renewing privileges at a
health care institution or a health care program.

16.  Advertising
in a false, deceptive or misleading manner.

17.  Representing
or claiming to be an osteopathic medical specialist if the physician has not
satisfied the applicable requirements of this chapter or board rules.

18.  The denial of Having a license denied or disciplinary
action taken against a license by any other state,
territory, district or country, unless it can be shown that this occurred for
reasons that did not relate to the person's ability to safely and skillfully
practice osteopathic medicine or to any act of unprofessional conduct as
provided in this section.

19.  Committing any conduct or practice contrary to recognized
standards of ethics of the osteopathic medical profession.

20.  Violating
or attempting to violate, directly or indirectly, or assisting in or abetting
the violation of or conspiring to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter.

21.  Failing
or refusing to establish and maintain adequate records on a patient as follows:

(a)  If
the patient is an adult, for at least six years after the last date the
licensee provided the patient with medical or health care services.

(b)  If
the patient is a child, either for at least three years after the child's
eighteenth birthday or for at least six years after the last date the licensee
provided that patient with medical or health care services, whichever date
occurs later.

22.  Using
controlled substances or prescription‑only drugs unless they are provided
by a medical practitioner, as defined in section 32‑1901, as part of a
lawful course of treatment.

23.  Prescribing
controlled substances to members of one's immediate family unless there is no
other physician available within fifty miles to treat a member of the family
and an emergency exists.

24.  Committing nontherapeutic use of injectable amphetamines.

25.  Violating
a formal order, probation or a stipulation issued by the board under this
chapter.

26.  Charging
or collecting an inappropriate fee.  This paragraph does not apply to
a fee that is fixed in a written contract between the physician and the patient
and entered into before treatment begins.

27.  Using
experimental forms of therapy without adequate informed patient consent or
without conforming to generally accepted criteria and complying with federal
and state statutes and regulations governing experimental therapies.

28.  Failing
to make patient medical records in the physician's possession promptly
available to a physician assistant, a nurse practitioner, a person licensed
pursuant to this chapter or a podiatrist, chiropractor, naturopathic physician,
physician or homeopathic physician licensed under chapter 7, 8, 13, 14 or 29 of
this title on receipt of proper authorization to do so from the patient, a
minor patient's parent, the patient's legal guardian or the patient's authorized
representative or failing to comply with title 12, chapter 13, article 7.1.

29.  Failing
to allow properly authorized board personnel to have, on presentation of a
subpoena, access to any documents, reports or records that are maintained by
the physician and that relate to the physician's medical practice or medically
related activities pursuant to section 32‑1855.01.

30.  Signing
a blank, undated or predated prescription form.

31.  Obtaining
a fee by fraud, deceit or misrepresentation.

32.  Failing
to report to the board an osteopathic physician and surgeon who is or may be
guilty of unprofessional conduct or is or may be mentally or physically unable
safely to engage in the practice of medicine.

33.  Referring
a patient to a diagnostic or treatment facility or prescribing goods and
services without disclosing that the physician has a direct pecuniary interest
in the facility, goods or services to which the patient has been referred or
prescribed.  This paragraph does not apply to a referral by one physician to
another physician within a group of physicians practicing together.

34.  Exhibiting a lack of or inappropriate direction, collaboration
or supervision of a licensed, certified or registered health care provider or
office personnel employed by or assigned to the physician in the medical care
of patients.

35.  Violating
a federal law, a state law or a rule applicable to the practice of medicine.

36.  Prescribing
or dispensing controlled substances or prescription‑only medications
without establishing and maintaining adequate patient records.

37.  Dispensing a
schedule II controlled substance that is an opioid.

37.  38.  Failing to dispense
drugs and devices in compliance with article 4 of this chapter.

38.  39.  Committing
any conduct or practice that endangers a patient's or the public's
health or may reasonably be expected to do so.

39.  40.  Committing
any conduct or practice that impairs the licensee's ability to safely
and skillfully practice medicine or that may reasonably be expected to do so.

40.  41.  With the exception of
heavy metal poisoning, using chelation therapy in the treatment of
arteriosclerosis or as any other form of therapy without adequate informed
patient consent and without conforming to generally accepted experimental criteria,
including protocols, detailed records, periodic analysis of results and
periodic review by a medical peer review committee.

41.  42.  Prescribing,
dispensing or administering anabolic‑androgenic steroids to a person for
other than therapeutic purposes.

42.  43.  Engaging in sexual
conduct with a current patient or with a former patient within six months after
the last medical consultation unless the patient was the licensee's spouse at
the time of the contact or, immediately preceding the physician‑patient
relationship, was in a dating or engagement relationship with the licensee. 
For the purposes of this paragraph, "sexual conduct" includes:

(a)  Engaging
in or soliciting sexual relationships, whether consensual or nonconsensual.

(b)  Making
sexual advances, requesting sexual favors or engaging in any other verbal
conduct or physical conduct of a sexual nature.

43.  44.  Committing
conduct that is in violation of section 36‑2302.

44.  45.  Committing
conduct that the board determines constitutes gross negligence, repeated
negligence or negligence that results in harm or death of a patient.

45.  46.  Committing
conduct in the practice of medicine that evidences moral unfitness to
practice medicine.

46.  47.  Engaging in disruptive
or abusive behavior in a professional setting.

47.  48.  Failing to disclose to
a patient that the licensee has a direct financial interest in a prescribed
treatment, good or service if the treatment, good or service is available on a
competitive basis.  This paragraph does not apply to a referral by
one licensee to another licensee within a group of licensees who practice
together.  A licensee meets the disclosure requirements of this paragraph if
both of the following are true:

(a)  The
licensee makes the disclosure on a form prescribed by the board.

(b)  The
patient or the patient's guardian or parent acknowledges by signing the form
that the licensee has disclosed the licensee's direct financial interest.

48.  49.  Prescribing,
dispensing or furnishing a prescription medication or a prescription‑only
device to a person if the licensee has not conducted a physical or mental
health status examination of that person or has not previously established a
physician‑patient relationship.  The physical or mental health status
examination may be conducted during a real-time telemedicine encounter with
audio and video capability, unless the examination is for the purpose of
obtaining a written certification from the physician for the purposes of title
36, chapter 28.1.  This paragraph does not apply to:

(a)  Emergencies.

(b)  A licensee who
provides patient care on behalf of the patient's regular treating licensed
health care professional or provides a consultation requested by the patient's
regular treating licensed health care professional.

(c)  Prescriptions
written or antimicrobials dispensed to a contact as defined in section 36‑661
who is believed to have had significant exposure risk as defined in section 36‑661
with another person who has been diagnosed with a communicable disease as
defined in section 36‑661 by the prescribing or dispensing physician.

(d)  Prescriptions
for epinephrine auto-injectors written or dispensed for a school district or
charter school to be stocked for emergency use pursuant to section 15‑157
or for an authorized entity to be stocked pursuant to section 36‑2226.01.

(e)  Prescriptions
written by a licensee through a telemedicine program that is covered by the
policies and procedures adopted by the administrator of a hospital or
outpatient treatment center.

(f)  Prescriptions
for naloxone hydrochloride or any other opioid antagonist approved by the
United States food and drug administration that are written or dispensed for
use pursuant to section 36‑2228 or 36‑2266.

49.  50.  If a licensee provides
medical care by computer, failing to disclose the licensee's license number and
the board's address and telephone number. END_STATUTE

Sec. 21.  Section 32-1871, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-1871.  Dispensing
of drugs and devices; conditions; exception; civil penalty

A.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section, an
osteopathic physician may dispense drugs and devices kept by the physician if:

1.  All
drugs are dispensed in packages labeled with the following information:

(a)  The
dispensing physician's name, address and telephone number.

(b)  The
date the drug is dispensed.

(c)  The
patient's name.

(d)  The
name and strength of the drug, directions for its use and any cautionary
statements.

2.  The
dispensing physician enters into the patient's medical record the name and
strength of the drug dispensed, the date the drug is dispensed and the
therapeutic reason.

3.  The
dispensing physician keeps all drugs in a locked cabinet or room, controls
access to the cabinet or room by a written procedure and maintains an ongoing
inventory of its contents.

4.  The
dispensing physician annually registers with the board to dispense drugs and
devices.

5.  The
dispensing physician pays the registration fee prescribed by the board pursuant
to section 32-1826.  This paragraph does not apply if the physician is
dispensing in a nonprofit practice and neither the patient nor a third party
pays or reimburses the physician or the nonprofit practice for the drugs or
devices dispensed.

6.  The
dispensing physician labels dispensed drugs and devices and stores them
according to rules adopted by the board.

B.  An
Osteopathic physician may not dispense a schedule II controlled substance that
is an opioid, except for an opioid that is for medication‑assisted
treatment for substance use disorders.

B.  C.  Except
in an emergency situation, a physician who dispenses drugs without being
registered by the board to do so is subject to a civil penalty by the board of
not less than three hundred dollars and not more than one thousand dollars for
each transaction and is prohibited from further dispensing for a period of time
as prescribed by the board.

C.  D.  Prior to Before dispensing a drug pursuant
to this section, the patient shall be given a written prescription on which
appears the following statement in bold type:  "This prescription may be
filled by the prescribing physician or by a pharmacy of your choice."

D.  E.  A
physician shall dispense only to the physician's patient and only for
conditions being treated by that physician.

E.  F.  The
board shall enforce this section and shall establish rules regarding labeling, record keeping recordkeeping, storage and
packaging of drugs that are consistent with the requirements of chapter 18 of
this title.  The board may conduct periodic inspections of dispensing practices
to assure ensure compliance with
this section and applicable rules.

F.  G.  If
a physician fails to renew a registration to dispense or ceases to dispense for
any reason, within thirty days that physician must notify the board in writing
of the remaining inventory of drugs and devices and the manner in which they
were disposed. END_STATUTE

Sec. 22.  Title 32, chapter 21, article 3, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 32-2239.01, to read:

START_STATUTE32-2239.01.  Duty
to report; clients seeking controlled substances; immunity

A.  A
veterinarian who reasonably suspects or believes that a client or person is
trying to obtain controlled substances with an intent other than to treat the
patient animal shall report that suspicion, or cause a report to be made, to
local law enforcement within forty‑eight hours after the treatment or
examination.  The report shall include the name and address of the
client or person who sought the examination or treatment.  The veterinary
records pertaining to the investigation initiated pursuant to the report to law
enforcement under this subsection shall be provided to local law enforcement on
request for any further criminal investigation.

B.  A
veterinarian who files a report or causes a report to be filed pursuant to
subsection A of this section is immune from civil liability with respect to any
report made in good faith.END_STATUTE

Sec. 23.  Section 32-2281, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-2281.  Dispensing
of drugs and devices; conditions; definition

A.  A
veterinarian may dispense drugs and devices kept by the veterinarian if:

1.  All
prescription‑only drugs are dispensed in packages labeled with the
following information:

(a)  The
dispensing veterinarian's name, address and telephone number.

(b)  The
date the drug is dispensed.

(c)  The
animal owner's name and the animal's or herd's identification.

(d)  The
name, strength and quantity of the drug, directions for its use and any
cautionary statements.

2.  The
dispensing veterinarian enters into the medical record the name, strength and
quantity of the drug dispensed, the date the drug is dispensed and the
therapeutic reason.

B.  A
veterinarian dispensing a schedule II controlled substance or a benzodiazepine
shall comply with the following:

1.  Limit
the initial amount of a schedule II controlled substance dispensed by the
veterinarian to a five‑day supply at a dosage clinically appropriate for
the animal being treated.  A prescription that is filled at a pharmacy is not
subject to this limit.

2.  Limit
the initial amount of a benzodiazepine dispensed by the veterinarian to a
fourteen‑day supply at a dosage clinically appropriate for the animal
being treated.  A prescription that is filled at a pharmacy is not subject to
this limit.

3.  For
treatment of an animal with a chronic condition that requires long‑term
use of a schedule II controlled substance or benzodiazepine, after the initial
five‑day or fourteen‑day period pursuant to paragraph 1 or 2 of
this subsection, dispense not more than a thirty‑day supply at one time
at a dosage clinically appropriate for the animal being treated.  A
prescription for a chronic condition that is filled at a pharmacy is not
subject to this limit.  For the purposes of this paragraph, "chronic
condition" means a condition that requires ongoing treatment beyond the
five‑day or fourteen‑day period prescribed in paragraph 1 or 2 of
this subsection, including cancer, postsurgical treatment, posttraumatic
injury, neuropathic pain, chronic severe cough, collapsing trachea and
congestive heart failure.

B.  C.  The board shall adopt
rules providing that the animal's owner or the person responsible for the
animal shall be notified that some prescription‑only drugs may be
available at a pharmacy and a written prescription may be provided to the
animal's owner or the person responsible for the animal if requested.

C.  D.  A veterinarian shall
dispense only to the animal's owner or person responsible for the animal he the veterinarian is treating and only
for conditions being treated by that veterinarian.  The veterinarian
shall supervise the dispensing process.  In For the purposes of this subsection, "supervision"
means that a veterinarian makes the determination as to the legitimacy or the
advisability of the drugs or devices to be dispensed.

D.  E.  This
section shall be enforced by the board, which shall establish rules regarding
access to and labeling, record keeping
recordkeeping, storage and packaging of drugs that are consistent with
the requirements of chapter 18 of this title.  The board may conduct
periodic inspections of dispensing practices to assure ensure compliance with this section and applicable rules.

E.  F.  For
the purposes of this section, "dispense" means the delivery by a
veterinarian of a prescription‑only drug or device to an animal, an
animal's owner or the person responsible for an animal and includes the
prescribing, administering, packaging, labeling, compounding and security
necessary to prepare and safeguard the drug or device for delivery. END_STATUTE

Sec. 24.  Section 32-2501, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-2501.  Definitions

In this
chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:

1.  "Active
license" means a regular license issued pursuant to this
chapter.  

2.  "Adequate
records" means legible medical records containing, at a minimum,
sufficient information to identify the patient, support the diagnosis, justify
the treatment, accurately document the results, indicate advice and cautionary
warnings provided to the patient and provide sufficient information for another
practitioner to assume continuity of the patient's care at any point in the
course of treatment.

3.  "Advisory
letter" means a nondisciplinary letter to notify a physician assistant
that either:

(a)  While
there is insufficient evidence to support disciplinary action, the board
believes that continuation of the activities that led to the investigation may
result in further board action against the licensee. 

(b)  The
violation is a minor or technical violation that is not of sufficient merit to
warrant disciplinary action.

(c)  While
the licensee has demonstrated substantial compliance through rehabilitation or
remediation that has mitigated the need for disciplinary action, the board
believes that repetition of the activities that led to the investigation may result
in further board action against the licensee.

4.  "Approved
program" means a physician assistant educational program accredited by the
accreditation review commission on education for physician assistants, or one
of its predecessor agencies, the committee on allied health education and
accreditation or the commission on the accreditation of allied health
educational programs.

5.  "Board"
means the Arizona regulatory board of physician assistants.

6.  "Completed
application" means an application for which the applicant has supplied all
required fees, information and correspondence requested by the board on forms
and in a manner acceptable to the board.

7.  "Immediate
family" means the spouse, natural or adopted children, father, mother,
brothers and sisters of the physician assistant and the natural or adopted
children, father, mother, brothers and sisters of the physician assistant's
spouse.

8.  "Letter
of reprimand" means a disciplinary letter that is issued by the board and
that informs the physician assistant that the physician assistant's conduct
violates state or federal law and may require the board to monitor the
physician assistant.

9.  "Limit"
means a nondisciplinary action that is taken by the board and that alters a
physician assistant's practice or medical activities if there is evidence that
the physician assistant is or may be mentally or physically unable to safely
engage in health care tasks.

10.  "Medically
incompetent" means that a physician assistant lacks sufficient medical
knowledge or skills, or both, in performing delegated health care tasks to a
degree likely to endanger the health or safety of patients.

11.  "Minor
surgery" means those invasive procedures that may be delegated to a
physician assistant by a supervising physician, that are consistent with the
training and experience of the physician assistant, that are normally taught in
courses of training approved by the board and that have been approved by the
board as falling within a scope of practice of a physician assistant.  Minor
surgery does not include a surgical abortion.

12.  "Physician"
means a physician who is licensed pursuant to chapter 13 or 17 of this title.

13.  "Physician
assistant" means a person who is licensed pursuant to this chapter and who
practices medicine with physician supervision.

14.  "Regular
license" means a valid and existing license that is issued
pursuant to section 32‑2521 to perform health care tasks.

15.  "Restrict"
means a disciplinary action that is taken by the board and that alters a physician
assistant's practice or medical activities if there is evidence that the
physician assistant is or may be medically incompetent or guilty of
unprofessional conduct.

16.  "Supervising
physician" means a physician who holds a current unrestricted license, who
supervises a physician assistant and who assumes legal responsibility for
health care tasks performed by the physician assistant.

17.  "Supervision"
means a physician's opportunity or ability to provide or exercise direction and
control over the services of a physician assistant. Supervision does not
require a physician's constant physical presence if the supervising physician
is or can be easily in contact with the physician assistant by
telecommunication.

18.  "Unprofessional
conduct" includes the following acts by a physician assistant that occur
in this state or elsewhere:

(a)  Violation of Violating any federal or
state law or rule that applies to the performance of health care tasks as a
physician assistant.  Conviction in any court of competent jurisdiction is
conclusive evidence of a violation.

(b)  Claiming
to be a physician or knowingly permitting another person to represent that
person as a physician.

(c)  Performing
health care tasks that have not been delegated by the supervising physician.

(d)  Exhibiting habitual intemperance in the use of alcohol or
habitual substance abuse.

(e)  Signing
a blank, undated or predated prescription form.

(f)  Committing gross malpractice, repeated malpractice or any
malpractice resulting in the death of a patient.

(g)  Representing
that a manifestly incurable disease or infirmity can be permanently cured or
that a disease, ailment or infirmity can be cured by a secret method,
procedure, treatment, medicine or device, if this is not true.

(h)  Refusing
to divulge to the board on demand the means, method, procedure, modality of
treatment or medicine used in the treatment of a disease, injury, ailment or
infirmity.

(i)  Prescribing
or dispensing controlled substances or prescription‑only drugs for which
the physician assistant is not approved or in excess of the amount authorized
pursuant to this chapter.

(j)  Committing any conduct or practice that is or might be harmful
or dangerous to the health of a patient or the public.

(k)  Violation of Violating a formal order,
probation or stipulation issued by the board.

(l)  Failing
to clearly disclose the person's identity as a physician assistant in the
course of the physician assistant's employment.

(m)  Failing
to use and affix the initials "P.A." or "P.A.‑C."
after the physician assistant's name or signature on charts, prescriptions or
professional correspondence.

(n)  Procuring
or attempting to procure a physician assistant license by fraud,
misrepresentation or knowingly taking advantage of the mistake of another.

(o)  Having
professional connection with or lending the physician assistant's name to an
illegal practitioner of any of the healing arts.

(p)  Failing
or refusing to maintain adequate records on a patient.

(q)  Using
controlled substances that have not been prescribed by a physician, physician
assistant, dentist or nurse practitioner for use during a prescribed course of
treatment.

(r)  Prescribing
or dispensing controlled substances to members of the physician assistant's
immediate family.

(s)  Prescribing,
dispensing or administering any controlled substance or prescription‑only
drug for other than accepted therapeutic purposes.

(t)  Dispensing
a schedule II controlled substance that is an opioid.

(t)  (u)  Knowingly
making any written or oral false or fraudulent statement in connection with the
performance of health care tasks or when applying for privileges or renewing an
application for privileges at a health care institution.

(u)  (v)  Committing
a felony, whether or not involving moral turpitude, or a misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude.  In either case, conviction by a court of competent
jurisdiction or a plea of no contest is conclusive evidence of the commission.

(v)  (w)  Having
a certification or license refused, revoked, suspended, limited or restricted
by any other licensing jurisdiction for the inability to safely and skillfully
perform health care tasks or for unprofessional conduct as defined by that
jurisdiction that directly or indirectly corresponds to any act of
unprofessional conduct as prescribed by this paragraph.

(w)  (x)  Having
sanctions including restriction, suspension or removal from practice imposed by
an agency of the federal government.

(x)  (y)  Violating
or attempting to violate, directly or indirectly, or assisting in or abetting
the violation of or conspiring to violate a provision of this chapter.

(y)  (z)  Using
the term "doctor" or the abbreviation "Dr." on a name tag
or in a way that leads the public to believe that the physician assistant is
licensed to practice as an allopathic or an osteopathic physician in this
state.

(z)  (aa)  Failing
to furnish legally requested information to the board or its investigator in a
timely manner.

(aa)  (bb)  Failing
to allow properly authorized board personnel to examine on demand documents,
reports and records of any kind relating to the physician assistant's
performance of health care tasks.

(bb)  (cc)  Knowingly
making a false or misleading statement on a form required by the board or in
written correspondence or attachments furnished to the board.

(cc)  (dd)  Failing
to submit to a body fluid examination and other examinations known to detect
the presence of alcohol or other drugs pursuant to an agreement with the board
or an order of the board.

(dd)  (ee)  Violating
a formal order, probation agreement or stipulation issued or entered into by
the board or its executive director.

(ee)  (ff)  Except
as otherwise required by law, intentionally betraying a professional secret or
intentionally  violating a privileged communication.

(ff)  (gg)  Allowing
the use of the licensee's name in any way to enhance or permit the continuance
of the activities of, or maintaining a professional connection with, an illegal
practitioner of medicine or the performance of health care tasks by a person
who is not licensed pursuant to this chapter.

(gg)  (hh)  Committing false, fraudulent, deceptive or misleading
advertising by a physician assistant or the physician assistant's staff or
representative.

(hh)  (ii)  Knowingly
failing to disclose to a patient on a form that is prescribed by the board and
that is dated and signed by the patient or guardian acknowledging that the
patient or guardian has read and understands that the licensee has a direct financial
interest in a separate diagnostic or treatment agency or in nonroutine goods or
services that the patient is being prescribed and if the prescribed treatment,
goods or services are available on a competitive basis.  This
subdivision does not apply to a referral by one physician assistant to another
physician assistant or to a doctor of medicine or a doctor of osteopathy osteopathic medicine within a group working together.

(ii)  (jj)  With
the exception of heavy metal poisoning, using chelation therapy in the treatment
of arteriosclerosis or as any other form of therapy without adequate informed
patient consent or without conforming to generally accepted experimental
criteria including protocols, detailed records, periodic analysis of results
and periodic review by a medical peer review committee, or without approval by
the United States food and drug administration or its successor agency.

(jj)  (kk)  Prescribing,
dispensing or administering anabolic or androgenic steroids for other than
therapeutic purposes.

(kk)  (ll)  Prescribing,
dispensing or furnishing a prescription medication or a prescription‑only
device as defined in section 32‑1901 to a person unless the licensee
first conducts a physical examination of that person or has previously
established a professional relationship with the person.  This subdivision does
not apply to: 

(i)  A
physician assistant who provides temporary patient care on behalf of the
patient's regular treating licensed health care professional.

(ii)  Emergency
medical situations as defined in section 41‑1831.

(iii)  Prescriptions
written to prepare a patient for a medical examination.

(iv)  Prescriptions
written or antimicrobials dispensed to a contact as defined in section 36-661
who is believed to have had significant exposure risk as defined in section
36-661 with another person who has been diagnosed with a communicable disease
as defined in section 36-661 by the prescribing or dispensing physician
assistant.

(ll)  (mm)  Engaging
in sexual conduct with a current patient or with a former patient within six
months after the last medical consultation unless the patient was the
licensee’s spouse at the time of the contact or, immediately preceding the
professional relationship, was in a dating or engagement relationship with the
licensee.  For the purposes of this subdivision, "sexual
conduct" includes:

(i)  Engaging
in or soliciting sexual relationships, whether consensual or nonconsensual.

(ii)  Making
sexual advances, requesting sexual favors or engaging in other verbal conduct
or physical contact of a sexual nature with a patient.

(iii)  Intentionally
viewing a completely or partially disrobed patient in the course of treatment
if the viewing is not related to patient diagnosis or treatment under current
practice standards. 

(mm)  (nn)  Performing
health care tasks under a false or assumed name in this state. END_STATUTE

Sec. 25.  Section 32-2532, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-2532.  Prescribing,
administering and dispensing drugs; limits and requirements; notice

A.  Except
as provided in subsection F of this section, a physician assistant shall not
prescribe, dispense or administer:

1.  A
schedule II or schedule III controlled substance as defined in the federal
controlled substances act of 1970 (P.L. 91‑513; 84 Stat. 1242; 21 United
States Code section 802) without delegation by the supervising physician, board
approval and United States drug enforcement
administration registration.

2.  A
schedule IV or schedule V controlled substance as defined in the federal
controlled substances act of 1970 without United States drug
enforcement administration registration and delegation by the supervising
physician.

3.  Prescription‑only
medication without delegation by the supervising physician.

4.  Prescription
medication intended to perform or induce an abortion.

B.  All
prescription orders issued by a physician assistant shall contain the name,
address and telephone number of the supervising physician.  A
physician assistant shall issue prescription orders for controlled substances
under the physician assistant's own United States drug
enforcement administration registration number.

C.  Unless
certified for thirty day thirty-day prescription
privileges pursuant to section 32‑2504, subsection A, a physician
assistant shall not prescribe a schedule II or schedule III controlled
substance for a period exceeding seventy‑two hours.  For each schedule IV
or schedule V controlled substance, a physician assistant may not prescribe the
controlled substance more than five times in a six month six-month period for each patient.

D.  A
prescription for a schedule II or III controlled substance is not refillable
without the written consent of the supervising physician.

E.  Prescription‑only
drugs shall not be dispensed, prescribed or refillable for a period exceeding
one year.

F.  Except
in an emergency, a physician assistant may dispense schedule II or schedule III
controlled substances for a period of use of not to exceed seventy‑two
hours with board approval or any other controlled substance for a period of use
of not to exceed thirty‑four days and may administer controlled
substances without board approval if it is medically indicated in an emergency
dealing with potential loss of life or limb or major acute traumatic pain.  Notwithstanding the authority granted in this subsection, a physician
assistant may not dispense a schedule II controlled substance that is an
opioid, except for an opioid that is for medication‑assisted treatment
for substance use disorders.

G.  Except
for samples provided by manufacturers, all drugs dispensed by a physician
assistant shall be:

1.  Prepackaged
in a unit‑of‑use package by the supervising physician or a
pharmacist acting on a written order of the supervising physician.

2.  Labeled
to show the name of the supervising physician and physician assistant.

H.  A
physician assistant shall not obtain a drug from any source other than the
supervising physician or a pharmacist acting on a written order of the
supervising physician.  A physician assistant may receive
manufacturers' samples if allowed to do so by the supervising physician.

I.  If
a physician assistant is approved by the board to prescribe, administer or
dispense schedule II and schedule III controlled substances, the physician
assistant shall maintain an up‑to‑date and complete log of all
schedule II and schedule III controlled substances he the physician assistant administers or dispenses.  The board may not grant a physician assistant the authority to
dispense schedule II controlled substances that are opioids, except for opioids
that are for medication‑assisted treatment for substance use disorders.

J.  The
board shall advise the Arizona state board of pharmacy
and the United States drug enforcement administration of all physician
assistants who are authorized to prescribe or dispense drugs and any
modification of their authority.

K.  The
Arizona state board of pharmacy shall notify all pharmacies
at least quarterly of physician assistants who are authorized to prescribe or
dispense drugs. END_STATUTE

Sec. 26.  Section 32-2933, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-2933.  Definition
of unprofessional conduct

A.  In
this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, "unprofessional
conduct" includes the following acts, whether occurring in this state or
elsewhere:

1.  Performing
an invasive surgical procedure not specifically permitted by this chapter or by
board rules or pursuant to a license issued under chapter 13 or 17 of this
title.

2.  Wilful betrayal of Wilfully betraying a
professional secret or wilful violation of wilfully
violating a privileged communication except as either of these may
otherwise be required by law.  This paragraph does not prevent
members of the board from the full and free exchange of information with the
licensing and disciplinary boards of other states, territories or districts of
the United States or with foreign countries or with the Arizona homeopathic and
integrative medical association or any of its component organizations or with
the homeopathic medical organizations of other states, counties, districts or
territories or with those of foreign countries.

3.  Commission of Committing a felony, whether
or not involving moral turpitude, or a misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude.  In either case, conviction by any court of competent
jurisdiction or a plea of no contest is deemed conclusive evidence of guilt.

4.  Exhibiting habitual intemperance in the use of alcohol or
habitual substance abuse.

5.  Violating
federal, state, county or municipal laws or regulations applicable to the
practice of medicine or relating to public health.

6.  Prescribing
a controlled substance for other than accepted therapeutic purposes.

7.  Committing conduct that the board determines is gross
professional negligence, repeated professional negligence or any negligence
that causes the death of a patient.

8.  Impersonating
another person licensed pursuant to this chapter.

9.  Acting
or assuming to act as a member of the board if this is not true.

10.  Procuring
or attempting to procure a license to practice homeopathic medicine by fraud,
by misrepresentation or by knowingly taking advantage of the mistake of
another.

11.  Having
professional connection with or lending one's name to an illegal practitioner
of homeopathic medicine or of any of the other healing arts.

12.  Representing
that a manifestly incurable disease, injury, ailment or infirmity can be
permanently cured or that a curable disease, injury, ailment or infirmity can
be cured within a stated time if this is not true.

13.  Offering,
undertaking or agreeing to cure or treat a disease, injury, ailment or
infirmity by a secret means, method, device or instrumentality.

14.  Refusing
to divulge to the board on demand the means, method, device or instrumentality
used in the treatment of a disease, injury, ailment or infirmity.

15.  Giving
or receiving or aiding or abetting the giving or receiving of rebates, either
directly or indirectly.

16.  Knowingly
making any false or fraudulent statement, written or oral, in connection with
the practice of homeopathic medicine except as the same may be necessary for
accepted therapeutic purposes.

17.  Exhibiting immorality or misconduct that tends to discredit the
profession.

18.  Being
disciplined by another regulatory jurisdiction because of the licensee's mental
or physical inability to engage safely in the practice of medicine, medical
incompetence or unprofessional conduct as defined by that jurisdiction and that
corresponds directly or indirectly with an act of unprofessional conduct
prescribed by this section.  The disciplinary action may include
refusing, denying, revoking or suspending a license, issuing a formal
reprimand, issuing a decree of censure or otherwise limiting, restricting or
monitoring the licensee or placing the licensee on probation.

19.  Committing any conduct or practice contrary to recognized
standards of ethics of the homeopathic medical profession, any conduct or
practice that does or might constitute a danger to the health, welfare or
safety of the patient or the public or any conduct, practice or condition that
does or might impair the ability to practice homeopathic medicine safely and
skillfully.

20.  Failing
or refusing to maintain adequate records on a patient or to make patient
records promptly available to another licensee on request and receipt of proper
authorization.

21.  Advertising
in a false, deceptive or misleading manner.

22.  Violating
or attempting to violate, directly or indirectly, or assisting in or abetting
the violation of or conspiring to violate this chapter or any board rule.

23.  Using
a controlled substance unless it is prescribed by a physician for use during a
prescribed course of treatment.

24.  Prescribing,
dispensing or administering anabolic androgenic steroids for other than
therapeutic purposes.

25.  Prescribing
or dispensing controlled substances to members of the licensee's immediate
family.

26.  Prescribing,
dispensing or administering schedule II controlled substances as defined in
section 36‑2513, including amphetamines and similar schedule II sympathomimetic
drugs in the treatment of exogenous obesity for a period in excess of thirty
days in any one year, or the nontherapeutic use of injectable amphetamines.

27.  Dispensing
a schedule II controlled substance that is an opioid.

27.  28.  The use of
Using experimental forms of diagnosis and treatment
without adequate informed patient consent, without a board approved written
disclosure that the form of diagnosis and treatment to be used is experimental
and without conforming to generally accepted experimental criteria, including
protocols, detailed records, periodic analysis of results and periodic review
by a peer review committee.

28.  29.  Engaging
in sexual intimacies with a patient.

29.  30.  Use of
Using the designation "M.D." or
"D.O." in a way that would lead the public to believe that a person
is licensed by the Arizona medical board or the board of osteopathic examiners
in medicine and surgery in this state if this is not the case.

30.  31.  Falsely or
fraudulently representing or holding oneself out as being a homeopathic medical
specialist.

31.  32.  Failing to dispense
drugs and devices in compliance with article 4 of this chapter.

32.  33.  Violating a formal
board order, terms of probation or a stipulation issued or entered into by the board
or its designee under this chapter.

33.  34.  Charging a fee for
services not rendered or charging and collecting a clearly unreasonable
fee.  In determining the reasonableness of the fee, the board shall
consider the fee customarily charged in this state for similar services in
relation to modifying factors such as the time required, the complexity of the
service and the skill required to perform the service properly.  This
paragraph does not apply if there is a clearly written contract for a fixed fee
between the licensee and the patient that is entered into before the licensee
provides the service.

34.  35.  Failing to
appropriately direct, collaborate with or supervise a licensed, certified or
registered health care provider, a homeopathic medical assistant or office
personnel employed or assigned to the licensee to assist in the medical care of
patients.

35.  36.  Knowingly making a
false or misleading statement on a form required by the board or in written
correspondence with the board.

36.  37.  Failing to furnish
legally requested information in a timely manner to the board or its
investigators or representatives.

37.  38.  Failing to allow
properly authorized board personnel to examine or have access to a licensee's
documents, reports or records that relate to the licensee's medical practice or
medically related activities.

38.  39.  Signing a blank,
undated or predated prescription form.

39.  40.  Refusing to submit to
a body fluid examination required under section 32‑2941 or pursuant to a
board investigation into the licensee's substance abuse.

40.  41.  Prescribing,
dispensing or furnishing a prescription medication or a prescription-only
device as defined in section 32‑1901 to a person unless the licensee
first conducts a comprehensive physical or mental health status examination of
that person or has previously established a doctor-patient relationship.  This
paragraph does not apply to:

(a)  A
licensee who provides temporary patient supervision on behalf of the patient's
regular treating licensed health care professional.

(b)  Emergency
medical situations as defined in section 41‑1831.

(c)  Prescriptions
written to prepare a patient for a medical examination.

(d)  Prescriptions
written or prescription medications issued for use by a county or tribal public
health department for immunization programs or emergency treatment or in
response to an infectious disease investigation, a public health emergency, an
infectious disease outbreak or an act of bioterrorism.  For the
purposes of this subdivision, "bioterrorism" has the same meaning
prescribed in section 36‑781.

41.  42.  Failing to obtain from
a patient before an examination or treatment a signed informed consent that
includes language that makes it clear the licensee is providing homeopathic
medical treatment instead of or in addition to standard conventional allopathic
or osteopathic treatment.

B.  If
a person is licensed pursuant to section 32‑2912, subsection B,
unprofessional conduct also includes the following:

1.  Performing
an invasive procedure, including performing intravenous therapy, drawing bodily
fluids or ordering genetic testing.

2.  Prescribing,
dispensing or administering any controlled substance.

3.  Prescribing,
dispensing or administering a prescription drug.

4.  Using
the title "physician", "medical doctor-homeopathic",
"doctor of osteopathy‑homeopathic", "doctor of medicine
(homeopathic)" or "homeopathic physician" or otherwise implying
that the licensee is a licensed allopathic or osteopathic physician.

5.  Failing
to correct a known misunderstanding regarding the licensee's licensure status.

6.  Failing
to obtain from a patient before an examination or treatment a signed informed
consent that includes language that makes it clear the licensee is not an
allopathic or osteopathic physician and is providing homeopathic treatment
under the limited scope of practice of homeopathic medicine pursuant to this
chapter.

7.  Failing
to consult with or refer patients to other health care providers when
appropriate.

8.  Discontinuing
or advising a patient to discontinue a physician's treatment or medicine
without first consulting the prescribing or treating physician.

9.  Failing
to refer a patient with a life threatening illness to a licensed allopathic or
osteopathic physician currently practicing homeopathic, allopathic or
osteopathic medicine. END_STATUTE

Sec. 27.  Section 32-2951, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-2951.  Dispensing
drugs and devices; conditions; exception; civil penalty; definition

A.  Except as provided in subsection C of this section, a person
who is licensed pursuant to section 32‑2912, subsection A may dispense
drugs and devices kept by the licensee, including:

1.  Controlled substances. 

2.  Prescription‑only drugs. ,  

3.  Homeopathic medications. and 

4.  Nonprescription drugs. ,  

B.  A
person who is licensed pursuant to section 32-2912, subsection A may dispense
drugs and devices under subsection A of this section if:

1.  The
licensee includes the following information on the label of each controlled
substance and prescription‑only drug and on the label or accompanying
instruction sheets of each homeopathic medication or nonprescription drug:

(a)  The
licensee's name, address and telephone number.

(b)  The
date the drug is dispensed.

(c)  The
patient's name.

(d)  The
name and strength of the drug, the quantity dispensed, directions for its use
and any cautionary statements.

(e)  The
number of authorized refills.

2.  The
licensee enters into the patient's medical record the name, strength and
potency of the drug dispensed, the date the drug is dispensed, the dosing
schedule, the number of refills and the therapeutic reason.

3.  The
licensee keeps all controlled substances in a locked cabinet or room, controls
access to the cabinet or room by a written procedure and maintains an ongoing
inventory of its contents.

4.  The
licensee pays a permit fee prescribed under section 32‑2914.

C.  A
person who is licensed pursuant to section 32‑2912, subsection A may not
dispense a schedule II controlled substance that is an opioid, except for an
opioid that is for medication‑assisted treatment for substance use
disorders.

B.  D.  Except
in an emergency situation, a licensee who dispenses drugs for a profit without
being registered by the board to do so is subject to a civil penalty by the
board of not less than three hundred dollars and not more than one thousand
dollars for each transaction and is prohibited from further dispensing for a
period of time as prescribed by the board.

C.  E.  Before
a licensee dispenses a controlled substance or a prescription‑only
pharmaceutical drug pursuant to this subsection A  B of this section, the licensee
shall give the patient a written prescription on which appears the following
statement in bold type:  "This prescription may be filled by the
prescribing physician or by a pharmacy of your choice."

D.  F.  The
licensee shall include the following information on a prescription order:

1.  The
date it is issued.

2.  The
patient's name and address.

3.  The
name, strength and quantity of the drug.

4.  Two
signature lines for the licensee.  The right side of the prescription
form under the signature line shall contain the phrase "Substitution
Permissible" and the left side under the signature line shall contain the
phrase "Dispense As Written".

5.  The
dispensing licensee's United States drug enforcement
agency number for controlled substances.

6.  The
date and the printed name and signature of the person who prepares, counts or
measures the drug, labels the container or distributes a prepackaged drug to
the patient or the patient's representative.

E.  G.  Before
the licensee dispenses a homeopathic medication, including a prescription‑only
homeopathic medication or a nonprescription drug, the licensee shall give the
patient a written statement on which appears the following statement in bold
type:  "Prescriptions may be filled by this prescribing
physician or by a pharmacy of your choice." 

F.  H.  A
person who is licensed pursuant to section 32‑2912, subsection A shall
dispense controlled substances, except schedule II controlled
substances that are opioids, and prescription‑only drugs for
profit only to the licensee's own patient and only for conditions being treated
by that licensee.  The licensee shall personally determine the
legitimacy or advisability of the drugs dispensed and shall document in writing
the licensee's procedures for supervising the role of nurses and attendants in
the dispensing process.

G.  I.  A
person who is licensed pursuant to section 32‑2912, subsection B may
dispense only those drugs and devices kept by that licensee that are
homeopathic medications and nonprescription drugs,
including nutritional supplements, and must include the
following information on the label or accompanying instruction sheets of each
homeopathic medication or nonprescription drug:

1.  The
dispensing licensee's name, address and telephone number.

2.  The
date the substance is dispensed.

3.  The
patient's name.

4.  The
name and strength of the substance, the quantity dispensed, directions for its
use and any cautionary statements.

H.  J.  A
licensee who dispenses drugs and devices pursuant to subsection G 
I of this section must enter into the patient's medical
record the name, strength and potency of the substance dispensed, the date the
substance is dispensed, the dosing schedule and the therapeutic reason.

I.  K.  A
person who is licensed pursuant to section 32‑2912, subsection B may not
dispense controlled substances or prescription‑only substances.

J.  L.  This
section shall be enforced by the board, which shall establish rules regarding
labeling, record keeping recordkeeping,
storage and packaging of drugs that are consistent with the requirements of
chapter 18 of this title. The board may conduct periodic inspections of
dispensing practices to ensure compliance with this section and applicable
rules.

K.  M.  For
the purposes of this section, "dispense" means the delivery by a
licensee of a drug or device to a patient, except for samples packaged for
individual use by licensed manufacturers or repackagers of drugs, and includes
the prescribing, administering, packaging, labeling and security necessary to
prepare and safeguard the drug or device for delivery. END_STATUTE

Sec. 28.  Title 32, chapter 32, article 1, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 32-3201.01, to read:

START_STATUTE32-3201.01.  Definition
of medication-assisted treatment

In
this title, unless the context otherwise requires, "medication‑assisted
treatment" means the use of pharmacological medications that are approved
by the United States food and drug administration, in combination with
counseling and behavioral therapies, to provide a whole patient approach to the
treatment of substance use disorders. END_STATUTE

Sec. 29.  Title 32, chapter 32, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended by adding article 4, to read:

ARTICLE
4.  CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES

START_STATUTE32-3248.  Health
professionals; controlled substances; initial prescriptions; limits;
exceptions; definition

A.  A
health professional who is authorized under this title to prescribe controlled
substances shall limit the initial prescription for a patient for a schedule II
controlled substance that is an opioid to not more than a five‑day
supply, except that an initial prescription for a schedule II controlled
substance that is an opioid following a surgical procedure is limited to not
more than a fourteen‑day supply.

B.  Subsection
A of this section does not apply to initial prescriptions if the patient:

1.  Has
an active oncology diagnosis.

2.  Has
a traumatic injury, not including a surgical procedure.

3.  Is
receiving hospice care.

4.  Is
receiving end‑of‑life care.

5.  Is
receiving palliative care.

6.  Is
receiving skilled nursing facility care.

7.  Is
receiving treatment for burns.

8.  Is
receiving medication‑assisted treatment for a substance use disorder.

9.  Is
an infant who is being weaned off opioids at the time of hospital discharge.

C.  If
a health professional's prescribing authority under the relevant chapter of
this title for schedule II controlled substances is more restrictive than the
limit specified in subsection A of this section, the health professional's
prescribing authority under the relevant chapter of this title applies.

D.  For
the purposes of this section, "initial prescription" means a
prescription for a schedule II controlled substance that is an opioid that has
not covered any portion of the past sixty days before the date the pharmacy
dispenses the current prescription as evidenced by the controlled substances
prescription monitoring program's central database tracking system. END_STATUTE

START_STATUTE32-3248.01.  Schedule
II controlled substances; dosage limit; exceptions; morphine; opioid
antagonist; definition

A.  A
health professional who is authorized under this title to prescribe controlled
substances may not issue a new prescription order for a schedule II controlled
substance that is an opioid that exceeds ninety morphine milligram equivalents
per day.

B.  The
limit prescribed by subsection A of this section does not apply to:

1.  A
continuation of a prior prescription order that was issued within the previous
sixty days.

2.  An
opioid with a maximum approved total daily dose in the labeling as approved by
the United States food and drug administration.

3.  A
patient who:

(a)  Has
an active oncology diagnosis.

(b)  Has a
traumatic injury, not including a surgical procedure.

(c)  Is
receiving hospice care.

(d)  Is
receiving end‑of‑life care.

(e)  Is
receiving palliative care.

(f)  Is receiving
skilled nursing facility care.

(g)  Is
receiving treatment for burns.

(h)  Is
receiving medication‑assisted treatment for a substance use disorder.

(i)  Is
hospitalized.

C.  If
a health professional believes that a patient requires more than ninety
morphine milligram equivalents per day and the patient is not exempt from the
limit pursuant to subsection B of this section, the health professional shall
first consult with a physician who is licensed pursuant to chapter 13 or 17 of
this title and who is board‑certified in pain.  The consultation may be
done by telephone or through telemedicine.  If the consulting
physician is not available to consult within forty‑eight hours after the
request, the health professional may prescribe the amount that the health
professional believes the patient requires and subsequently have the
consultation.  If the health professional is a physician who is licensed
pursuant to chapter 13 or 17 of this title and is board‑certified in
pain, the health professional may issue a prescription order for more than
ninety morphine milligram equivalents per day without a consultation under this
subsection.

D.  If
a patient is prescribed more than ninety morphine milligram equivalents per day
pursuant to subsection B or C of this section, the prescribing health
professional shall also prescribe for the patient naloxone hydrochloride or any
other opioid antagonist that is approved by the United States food and drug
administration for the treatment of opioid‑related overdoses.

E.  For
the purposes of this section, "prescription order" has the same
meaning prescribed in section 32‑1901. END_STATUTE

START_STATUTE32-3248.02.  Health
professionals; substance use or addiction continuing medical education

A
health professional who is authorized under this title to prescribe schedule II
controlled substances and who has a valid United States drug enforcement
administration registration number or who is authorized under chapter 18 of
this title to dispense controlled substances shall complete a minimum of three
hours of opioid‑related, substance use disorder‑related or
addiction‑related continuing medical education each license renewal cycle
as part of any continuing education requirements for that health professional. END_STATUTE

Sec. 30.  Title 36, chapter 1, article 1, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding sections 36-109 and 36‑123, to
read:

START_STATUTE36-109.  Hospitals;
health care facilities; substance abuse treatment; reporting requirements

A.  On
or before September 1, 2018 and each quarter thereafter, each hospital or
health care facility in this state that provides substance abuse treatment
shall submit to the department on a form prescribed by the department a report
that includes at least the following information:

1.  The
name and address of the hospital or health care facility where the substance
abuse treatment is provided.

2.  The
type of hospital or health care facility where the substance abuse treatment is
provided.

3.  The
number of available substance abuse treatment beds.

4.  The
number of days in the quarter that the hospital or health care facility was at
capacity and not able to accept referrals for substance abuse treatment.

B.  The
form may be signed electronically and shall indicate that the person who signs
the report is attesting that the information in the report is correct to the
best of that person's knowledge. 

C.  A
report pursuant to this section shall be filed electronically at an internet
website that is designated by the department unless the person required to file
the report applies for a waiver from electronic reporting by submitting a
written request to the department.

D.  The
department shall request outpatient substance abuse treatment providers to
report to the department on a quarterly basis regarding the provider's
outpatient treatment capacity.

E.  On
or before December 31, 2018 and each quarter thereafter, the director shall
submit a report to the governor, the president of the senate and the speaker of
the house of representatives on the availability of substance abuse treatment
beds, the possible capacity, including outpatient treatment capacity, and any
unmet need in this state.  The director shall submit a copy of the report to
the secretary of state.  The report shall include all of the
information specified in subsection A of this section. END_STATUTE

START_STATUTE36-123.  Opioid
abuse prevention campaign

The department, in conjunction with the governor's
office of youth, faith and family, shall develop opioid abuse prevention
campaign strategies that target youth and at‑risk populations using a
variety of communications platforms to maximize outreach.  Communications
efforts may include social media, broadcast, billboards and print media. 
Prevention components shall include graphic detail of the harmful effects of
opioid and prescription drug abuse and law enforcement consequences and shall
engage external partners, including the local education agency, for age‑appropriate
awareness.END_STATUTE

Sec. 31.  Title 36, chapter 1, article 4, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 36-192, to read:

START_STATUTE36-192.  County
health departments; naloxone kits

The department and the Arizona
health care cost containment system shall continue to distribute naloXone kits
as necessary.  In addition, a county health department may provide to a person
who is at risk of experiencing or who is experiencing an opioid‑related
overdose a kit that contains naloxone hydrochloride or any other opioid
antagonist that is approved by the United States food and drug administration
for the treatment of a drug overdose. END_STATUTE

Sec. 32.  Section 36-407, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE36-407.  Prohibited
acts; required acts

A.  A
person shall not establish, conduct or maintain in this state a health care
institution or any class or subclass of health care institution unless that
person holds a current and valid license issued by the department specifying
the class or subclass of health care institution the person is establishing,
conducting or maintaining.  The license is valid only for the
establishment, operation and maintenance of the class or subclass of health
care institution, the type of services and, except for emergency admissions as
prescribed by the director by rule, the licensed capacity specified by the license.

B.  The
licensee shall not imply by advertising, directory listing or otherwise that
the licensee is authorized to perform services more specialized or of a higher
degree of care than is authorized by this chapter and the underlying rules for
the particular class or subclass of health care institution within which the
licensee is licensed.

C.  The
licensee may not transfer or assign the license.  A license is valid only for
the premises occupied by the institution at the time of its issuance.

D.  The
licensee shall not personally or through an agent offer or imply an offer of
rebate or fee splitting to any person regulated by title 32 or chapter 17 of
this title.

E.  The
licensee shall submit an itemized statement of charges to each patient.

F.  A
health care institution shall refer a patient who is discharged after receiving
emergency services for a drug‑related overdose to a behavioral health
services provider.
END_STATUTE

Sec. 33.  Title 36, chapter 4, article 2, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 36-425.04, to read:

START_STATUTE36-425.04.  Hospice
service agencies; policies and procedures; controlled substances

A
hospice service agency that is licensed pursuant to this chapter shall adopt
policies and procedures to inform and educate client families on the proper
disposal of schedule II controlled substances. END_STATUTE

Sec. 34.  Title 36, chapter 4, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended by adding article 8, to read:

ARTICLE 8.  PAIN MANAGEMENT CLINICS

START_STATUTE36-448.01.  Definitions

In this article, unless the
context otherwise requires:

1.  "Medication‑assisted
treatment" has the same meaning prescribed in section 32‑3201.01.

2.  "Pain
management clinic":

(a)  Means
a health care institution or a private office or clinic of a health care
provider licensed under title 32 in which a majority of the facility's patients
in any month are prescribed opioids, benzodiazepines, barbiturates or
carisoprodol, not including for medication‑assisted treatment, by a
health care provider from the health care institution or private office or
clinic for more than ninety days in a twelve‑month period.

(b)  Does
not include a hospital, urgent care center, ambulatory surgical center, hospice
facility or nursing care institution. END_STATUTE

START_STATUTE36-448.02.  Pain
management clinics; licensure requirements; rules

A.  Beginning
January 1, 2019, a pain management clinic shall meet the same licensure
requirements as prescribed in article 2 of this chapter for health care
institutions. At the time of licensure, a pain management clinic shall submit
to the director all documentation required by this article.

B.  The
department shall adopt rules that prescribe the following for pain management
clinics:

1.  Informed
consent requirements.

2.  The
responsibilities of the medical director.

3.  Record
maintenance.

4.  Reporting
requirements.

5.  Physical
examination requirements.

C.  Each
pain management clinic shall:

1.  On
or before each anniversary of the issue date of the pain management clinic's
license, submit to the director all documentation required by this article.

2.  Comply
with all department rules that govern pain management clinics.

3.  Have
a medical director who is a physician licensed pursuant to title 32, chapter 13
or 17 and who is under an unrestricted and unencumbered license. END_STATUTE

Sec. 35.  Section 36-2228, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE36-2228.  Administration
of opioid antagonists; training; immunity; designation by director; definition

A.  Pursuant
to a standing order issued by a physician licensed pursuant to title 32,
chapter 13 or 17 or a nurse practitioner licensed pursuant to title 32, chapter
15 and authorized by law to prescribe drugs, an emergency medical care
technician, or a peace officer or ancillary law enforcement employee who is trained in the
administration of naloxone hydrochloride or any other opioid antagonist that is
approved by the United States food and drug administration and designated by
the director may administer naloxone hydrochloride or another opioid antagonist
to a person who the emergency medical care technician, or peace officer or ancillary law enforcement
employee believes is suffering from an opioid‑related drug
overdose.

B.  The
department, in coordination with the Arizona peace officer standards and training
board, shall develop a training module for emergency medical care technicians, and peace officers and
ancillary law enforcement employees that provides training regarding the
identification of a person suffering from an opioid‑related drug overdose
and the use of naloxone hydrochloride or other opioid antagonists.

C.  Physicians
who are licensed pursuant to title 32, chapter 13 or 17 and who issue a
standing order, nurse practitioners who are licensed pursuant to title 32,
chapter 15 and authorized by law to prescribe drugs and who issue a standing
order and emergency medical care technicians, and peace officers and ancillary law enforcement
employees who administer naloxone hydrochloride or any other opioid
antagonist pursuant to this section are immune from professional liability and
criminal prosecution for any decision made, act or omission or injury that
results from that act if those persons act with reasonable care and in good
faith, except in cases of wanton or wilful neglect.  This section does not
create a duty to act or standard of care for peace officers or
ancillary law enforcement employees to administer an opioid antagonist.

D.  The
director shall designate opioid antagonists that may be used pursuant to this
section based on an evaluation of the opioid antagonist's safety and efficacy.

E.  For
the purposes of this section, "ancillary law enforcement employee"
means a detention officer, a probation or surveillance officer, a police aide
or assistant, a crime scene specialist, a crime laboratory employee or any
other type of law enforcement employee or employee of the state department of
corrections who is authorized by the person's employing agency to administer
naloxone hydrochloride or any other opioid antagonist that is approved by the United
States food and drug administration and designated by the director pursuant to
this section. END_STATUTE

Sec. 36.  Section 36-2267, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE36-2267.  Administration
of opioid antagonist; exemption from civil liability; definition

A.  A
person may administer an opioid antagonist that is prescribed or dispensed
pursuant to section 32‑1979 or 36‑2266 in accordance with the
protocol specified by the physician, nurse practitioner, pharmacist or other
health professional or that is received from a county health
department pursuant to section 36‑192 to a person who is
experiencing an opioid‑related overdose.

B.  A
person who in good faith and without compensation administers an opioid
antagonist to a person who is experiencing an opioid‑related overdose is
not liable for any civil or other damages as the result of any act or omission
by the person rendering the care or as the result of any act or failure to act
to arrange for further medical treatment or care for the person experiencing
the overdose, unless the person while rendering the care acts with gross
negligence, wilful misconduct or intentional wrongdoing.

C.  For
the purposes of this section, "person" includes an employee of a
school district or charter school who is acting in the person's official
capacity. END_STATUTE

Sec. 37.  Section 36-2525, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE36-2525.  Prescription
orders; labels; packaging; definition

A.  In
addition to the requirements of section 32‑1968 pertaining to
prescription orders for prescription‑only drugs, the prescription order
for a controlled substance shall bear the name, address and federal
registration number of the prescriber.  A prescription order for a
schedule II controlled substance drug other than a hospital drug order for a hospital
inpatient shall contain only one drug order per prescription
blank.  If authorized verbally by the prescriber, the pharmacist may
make changes to correct errors or omissions made by the prescriber on the
following parts of a written or electronic schedule II controlled
substance prescription order:

1.  The
date issued.

2.  The
strength, dosage form or quantity of drug.

3.  The
directions for its use.

B.  The
pharmacist must document on the original prescription order the changes that
were made pursuant to the verbal authorization and record the time and date the
authorization was granted.

C.  A
person who is registered to dispense controlled substances under this chapter
must keep and maintain prescription orders for controlled substances as
follows:

1.  Prescription
orders for controlled substances listed in schedules I and II must be
maintained in a separate prescription file for controlled substances listed in
schedules I and II only.

2.  Prescription
orders for controlled substances listed in schedules III, IV and V must be
maintained either in a separate prescription file for controlled substances
listed in schedules III, IV and V only or in a form that allows them to be
readily retrievable from the other prescription records of the
registrant.  For the purposes of this paragraph, "readily
retrievable" means that, when the prescription is initially filed, the
face of the prescription is stamped in red ink in the lower right corner with
the letter "C" in a font that is not less than one inch high and that
the prescription is filed in the usual consecutively numbered prescription file
for noncontrolled substance prescriptions.  The requirement to stamp the hard
copy prescription with a red "C" is waived if a registrant employs an
electronic data processing system or other electronic recordkeeping system for
prescriptions that permits identification by prescription number and retrieval
of original documents by the prescriber's name, patient's name, drug dispensed
and date filled.

D.  Except
in emergency situations in conformity with subsection E of this section, under
the conditions specified in subsections F and G of this section or when
dispensed directly by a medical practitioner to an ultimate user, a controlled
substance in schedule II shall not be dispensed without either the written
prescription order in ink or indelible pencil or typewritten and manually
signed by the medical practitioner or an electronic prescription order as
prescribed by federal law or regulation.  Beginning January 1,
2019, a schedule II controlled substance that is an opioid may be dispensed in
a county with a population of one hundred fifty thousand persons or more only
with an electronic prescription order as prescribed by federal law or
regulation.  Beginning July 1, 2019, a schedule II controlled substance that is
an opioid may be dispensed in a county with a population of less than one
hundred fifty thousand persons only with an electronic prescription order as
prescribed by federal law or regulation.  A prescription order for a
schedule II substance shall not be dispensed more than ninety days after the
date on which the prescription order was issued.  A limited service pharmacy as
defined in section 32‑1901 may sell and dispense a schedule II substance
prescribed by a medical practitioner who is located in another state if the
prescription was issued to the patient according to and in compliance with the
applicable laws of the state of the prescribing medical practitioner and
federal law.  A
prescription order for a schedule II controlled substance
shall not be refilled.

E.  In
emergency situations, emergency quantities of schedule II controlled
substances may be dispensed on an oral prescription order of a medical
practitioner.  Such an emergency prescription order shall be
immediately reduced to writing by the pharmacist and shall contain all the
information required for schedule II drugs controlled
substances except for the manual signing of the order by the medical
practitioner.  Within seven days after authorizing an emergency oral prescription
order, the prescribing medical practitioner shall cause a written prescription
order manually signed for the emergency quantity prescribed to be delivered to
the dispensing pharmacist or an electronic prescription order to be transmitted
to the dispensing pharmacist.  In addition to
conforming to other requirements for prescription orders for schedule II controlled substances, it the
prescription order shall indicate electronically or have written on its
face "authorization for emergency dispensing" and the date of the
oral order.  If the prescribing medical practitioner fails to deliver
such an emergency prescription order within seven days in conformance with
board rules, the pharmacist shall notify the board.  Failure of the pharmacist
to notify the board shall void voids the
authority conferred by this subsection to dispense without a written,
manually‑signed prescription order of a
medical practitioner that is electronic or that is written and
manually signed.

F.  The
following may be transmitted to a pharmacy by fax by a patient's medical
practitioner or the medical practitioner's agent:

1.  A
prescription order written for a schedule II controlled substance to be
compounded for the direct administration to a patient by parenteral, intravenous,
intramuscular, subcutaneous or intraspinal infusion.

2.  A
prescription order written for any schedule II controlled substance for a
resident of a long-term care facility.

3.  A
prescription order written for a schedule II controlled substance for a patient
enrolled in a hospice care program that is certified or paid for by medicare
under title XVIII or a hospice program that is licensed by this state.  The
medical practitioner or the medical practitioner's agent must note on the
prescription that the patient is a hospice patient.

G.  A
fax transmitted pursuant to subsection F of this section is the original
written prescription order for purposes of this section and must be maintained
as required by subsection C of this section.

H.  Except
when dispensed directly by a medical practitioner to an ultimate user, a
controlled substance included in schedule III or IV that requires a
prescription order as determined under state or federal laws shall not be
dispensed without a written or oral prescription order of a medical
practitioner
or an electronic prescription order as prescribed by federal law
or regulation.  The prescription order shall not be filled or
refilled more than six months after the date on which the prescription order
was issued.  A prescription order authorized to be refilled shall not be
refilled more than five times.  Additional quantities may only be authorized by
the prescribing medical practitioner through issuance of a new prescription
order that shall be treated by the pharmacist as a new and separate
prescription order.

I.  Except
when dispensed directly by a medical practitioner to an ultimate user, a
controlled substance that is included in schedule V and that requires a
prescription order as determined under state or federal laws shall not be
dispensed without a written or oral prescription order of a medical
practitioner.  The prescription order may be refilled as authorized by the
prescribing medical practitioner but shall not be filled or refilled more than
one year after the date of issuance.

J.  A
controlled substance that is listed in schedule III, IV or V and that does not
require a prescription order as determined under state or federal laws may be
dispensed at retail by a pharmacist, a pharmacy intern or a graduate intern
under the pharmacist's supervision without a prescription order to a purchaser
who is at least eighteen years of age if all of the following are true:

1.  It
is for a legitimate medical purpose.

2.  Not
more than two hundred forty cubic centimeters (eight ounces) of any such
controlled substance containing opium, nor more than one hundred twenty cubic
centimeters (four ounces) of any other such controlled substance, nor more than
forty‑eight dosage units of any such controlled substance containing
opium, nor more than twenty‑four dosage units of any other controlled
substance may be dispensed at retail to the same purchaser in any given forty‑eight-hour
period.

3.  No
more than one hundred dosage units of any single active ingredient ephedrine
preparation may be sold, offered for sale, bartered or given away to any one
person in any one thirty‑day period.

4.  The
pharmacist, pharmacy intern or graduate intern requires every purchaser of a
controlled substance under this subsection who is not
known to that person to furnish suitable identification, including proof of age
where if appropriate.

5.  A
bound record book for dispensing controlled substances under this subsection is
maintained by the pharmacist and contains the name and address of the
purchaser, the name and quantity of the controlled substance purchased, the
date of each purchase and the name or initials of the pharmacist, pharmacy
intern or graduate intern who dispensed the substance to the purchaser.  Such The book shall be maintained in
conformity with the recordkeeping requirements of section 36‑2523.

K.  In
the absence of a law requiring a prescription for a schedule V controlled
substance, the board, by rules, may require, or remove the requirement of, a
prescription order for a schedule V controlled substance.

L.  The
label on a container of a controlled substance that is directly
dispensed by a medical practitioner or pharmacist,  and that is not for the immediate administration to the
ultimate user, such as a bed patient in a hospital, shall bear the name and
address of the dispensing medical practitioner or pharmacist, the serial
number, the date of dispensing, the name of the prescriber, the name of the
patient or, if an animal, the name of the owner of the animal and the species
of the animal, the directions for use and cautionary statements, if any,
contained in the prescription order or required by law.  If the controlled
substance is included in schedule II, III or IV, the label shall bear a
transfer warning to the effect:  "Caution:  federal law
prohibits the transfer of this drug to any person other than the patient for
whom it was prescribed".  The container of a schedule II
controlled substance that is an opioid that is directly dispensed by a
pharmacist and that is not for the immediate administration to the ultimate
user shall have a red cap and a warning label prescribed by the board about
potential addiction.

M.  Controlled
substances in schedules II, III, IV and V may be dispensed as electronically
transmitted prescriptions if the prescribing medical practitioner is all of the
following:

1.  Properly
registered by the United States drug enforcement administration.

2.  Licensed
in good standing in the United States jurisdiction in which the medical
practitioner practices.

3.  Authorized
to issue such prescriptions in the jurisdiction in which the medical
practitioner is licensed.

N.  Notwithstanding
any other provision of this section, beginning January 1, 2019, each
prescription order that is issued by a medical practitioner in a county with a
population of one hundred fifty thousand persons or more for a schedule II
controlled substance that is an opioid shall be transmitted electronically to
the dispensing pharmacy.  NOTWITHSTANDING any other provision of this section, beginning
July 1, 2019, each prescription order that is issued by a medical practitioner
in a county with a population of less than one hundred fifty thousand persons
for a schedule II controlled substance that is an opioid shall be transmitted
electronically to the dispensing pharmacy.

O.  The
requirement in subsections D and N of this section for an electronic
prescription order does not apply to a prescription order for a schedule II
controlled substance that is an opioid that is issued for medication-assisted
treatment for a substance use disorder.

N.  P.  The board, by rule,
may provide additional requirements for prescribing and dispensing controlled
substances. 

Q.  The
board shall establish a process to grant a waiver for the requirement in
subsections D and N of this section for electronic prescription orders to a
medical practitioner who lacks adequate access to broadband or faces other
hardships that prevent the medical practitioner from implementing electronic
prescription orders.

R.  For
the purposes of this section, "medication‑assisted treatment"
has the same meaning prescribed in section 32‑3201.01. END_STATUTE

Sec. 38.  Section 36-2604, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE36-2604.  Use
and release of confidential information; definition

A.  Except
as otherwise provided in this section, prescription information submitted to
the board pursuant to this article is confidential and is not subject to public
inspection.  The board shall establish procedures to ensure the
privacy and confidentiality of patients and that patient information that is
collected, recorded and transmitted pursuant to this article is not disclosed
except as prescribed in this section.

B.  The
board or its designee shall review the prescription information collected
pursuant to this article.  If the board or its designee has reason to
believe an act of unprofessional or illegal conduct has occurred, the board or
its designee shall notify the appropriate professional licensing board or law
enforcement or criminal justice agency and provide the prescription information
required for an investigation.

C.  The
board may release data collected by the program to the following:

1.  A
person who is authorized to prescribe or dispense a controlled substance, or a
delegate who is authorized by the prescriber or dispenser, to assist that
person to provide medical or pharmaceutical care to a patient or to evaluate a
patient.

2.  An
individual who requests the individual's own prescription monitoring
information pursuant to section 12‑2293.

3.  A
medical practitioner regulatory board established pursuant to title 32, chapter
7, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 25 or 29.  Except as required
pursuant to subsection B of this section, the board shall provide this
information only if the requesting board states in writing that the information
is necessary for an open investigation or complaint.

4.  A
local, state or federal law enforcement or criminal justice agency.  Except as
required pursuant to subsection B of this section, the board shall provide this
information only if the requesting agency states in writing that the
information is necessary for an open investigation or complaint.

5.  The
Arizona health care cost containment system administration regarding persons
who are receiving services pursuant to chapter 29 of this
title.  Except as required pursuant to subsection B of this section,
the board shall provide this information only if the administration states in
writing that the information is necessary for an open investigation or
complaint, for performing a drug utilization review for controlled substances
to help combat opioid overuse or abuse or for ensuring the continuity of care.

6.  A
person who is serving a lawful order of a court of competent jurisdiction.

7.  A
person who is authorized to prescribe or dispense a controlled substance and
who performs an evaluation on an individual pursuant to section 23‑1026.

8.  A
county medical examiner or alternate medical examiner who is directing an
investigation into the circumstances surrounding a death as described in
section 11‑593 or a delegate who is authorized by the county medical
examiner or alternate medical examiner.

9.  The
department of health services regarding persons who are receiving or
prescribing controlled substances in order to implement a public health
response to address opioid overuse or abuse, including a review pursuant to
section 36‑198.  Except as required pursuant to subsection B of
this section, the board shall provide this information only if the department
states in writing that the information is necessary to implement a public
health response to help combat opioid overuse or abuse.

D.  The
board may provide data to public or private entities for statistical, research
or educational purposes after removing information that could be used to
identify individual patients or persons who received prescriptions from
dispensers.

E.  For
the purposes of this section, "delegate" means any of the following:

1.  A
licensed health care professional who is employed in the office of or in a
hospital with the prescriber or dispenser.

2.  An
unlicensed medical records technician, medical assistant or office manager who
is employed in the office of or in a hospital with the prescriber or dispenser
and who has received training regarding both the health insurance portability
and accountability act privacy standards, 45 Code of Federal Regulations part
164, subpart E, and security standards, 45 Code of Federal Regulations part
164, subpart C.

3.  A forensic
pathologist, medical death investigator or other qualified person who is
assigned duties in connection with a death investigation pursuant to section 11‑594.

4.  A
licensed pharmacy technician trainee, pharmacy technician or pharmacy intern
who works in a facility with the dispenser. END_STATUTE

Sec. 39.  Section 36-2606, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE36-2606.  Registration;
access; requirements; mandatory use; annual user satisfaction survey; report;
definitions

A.  A
medical practitioner regulatory board shall notify each medical practitioner
who receives an initial or renewal license and who intends to apply for
registration or has an active registration under the controlled substances act
(21 United States Code section sections
801 through 904) of the medical practitioner's responsibility to register with
the Arizona state board of pharmacy and be granted access to the controlled
substances prescription monitoring program's central database tracking system. 
The Arizona state board of pharmacy shall provide access to the central
database tracking system to each medical practitioner who has a valid license
pursuant to this title 32 and who
possesses an Arizona registration under the controlled substances act (21 United
States Code section sections 801
through 904).  The Arizona state board of pharmacy shall notify
each pharmacist of the pharmacist's responsibility to register with the Arizona
state board of pharmacy and be granted access to the controlled substances
prescription monitoring program's central database tracking system. The Arizona
state board of pharmacy shall provide access to the central database tracking
system to each pharmacist who has a valid license pursuant to title 32, chapter
18 and who is employed by a facility that has a valid United States drug
enforcement administration registration number.

B.  The
registration is:

1.  Valid
in conjunction with a valid United States drug enforcement administration
registration number and a valid license issued by a medical practitioner
regulatory board established pursuant to title 32, chapter 7, 11, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 25 or 29. 

2.  Valid
in conjunction with a valid license issued by the Arizona state board of
pharmacy for a pharmacist who is employed by a facility that has a valid United
States drug enforcement administration registration number.

2.  3.  Not transferable or
assignable.

C.  An
applicant for registration pursuant to this section must submit an application
as prescribed by the board.

D.  Pursuant
to a fee prescribed by the board by rule, the board may issue a replacement
registration to a registrant who requests a replacement because the original
was damaged or destroyed, because of a change of name or for any other good
cause as prescribed by the board.

E.  A
person who is authorized to access the controlled substances prescription
monitoring program's central database tracking system may do so using only that
person's assigned identifier and may not use the assigned identifier of another
person.

F.  Beginning
the later of October 1, 2017 or sixty days after the statewide health
information exchange has integrated the controlled substances prescription
monitoring program data into the exchange, a medical practitioner, before
prescribing an opioid analgesic or benzodiazepine controlled substance listed
in schedule II, III or IV for a patient, shall obtain a patient utilization
report regarding the patient for the preceding twelve months from the
controlled substances prescription monitoring program's central database
tracking system at the beginning of each new course of treatment and at least
quarterly while that prescription remains a part of the
treatment.  Each medical practitioner regulatory board shall notify
the medical practitioners licensed by that board of the applicable date.  A
medical practitioner may be granted a one‑year waiver from the
requirement in this subsection due to technological limitations that are not
reasonably within the control of the practitioner or other exceptional circumstances
demonstrated by the practitioner, pursuant to a process established by rule by
the Arizona state board of pharmacy.

G.  A
dispenser, before dispensing a schedule II controlled substance, shall obtain a
patient utilization report regarding the patient for the preceding twelve
months from the controlled substances prescription monitoring program's central
database tracking system at the beginning of each new course of treatment.  The
Arizona state board of pharmacy shall establish a process to provide to a
dispenser a waiver for up to one year after the effective date of this
amendment to this section from the requirement in this subsection due to
technological limitations that are not reasonably within the control of the
dispenser or other exceptional circumstances as demonstrated by the dispenser.

G.  H.  The
medical practitioner or dispenser is not required to
obtain a patient utilization report from the central database tracking system
pursuant to subsection F of this section if any of the following applies:

1.  The
patient is receiving hospice care or palliative care for a serious or chronic
illness. 

2.  The
patient is receiving care for cancer, a cancer‑related illness or
condition or dialysis treatment. 

3.  A
medical practitioner will administer the controlled substance.

4.  The
patient is receiving the controlled substance during the course of inpatient or
residential treatment in a hospital, nursing care facility, assisted living
facility, correctional facility or mental health facility. 

5.  The
medical practitioner is prescribing the controlled substance to the patient for
no more than a ten‑day five‑day
period for an invasive medical or dental procedure or a medical or dental
procedure that results in acute pain to the patient.

6.  The
medical practitioner is prescribing the controlled substance to the patient for
no more than a ten‑day five‑day
period for a patient who has suffered an acute injury or a medical or dental
disease process that is diagnosed in an emergency department setting and that
results in acute pain to the patient.  An acute injury or medical
disease process does not include back pain.

7.  The
medical practitioner is prescribing no more than a five‑day prescription
and has reviewed the program's central database tracking system for that
patient within the last thirty days, and the system shows that no other
prescriber has prescribed a controlled substance in the preceding thirty‑day
period.

H.  I.  If
a medical practitioner or dispenser uses electronic
medical records that integrate data from the controlled substances prescription
monitoring program, a review of the electronic medical records with the
integrated data shall be deemed compliant with the review of the program's
central database tracking system as required in subsection F of this section.

I.  J.  The
board shall promote and enter into data sharing agreements for the purpose of
integrating the controlled substances prescription monitoring program into
electronic medical records.

J.  K.  By
complying with this section, a medical practitioner or dispenser
acting in good faith, or the medical practitioner's or
dispenser's employer, is not subject to liability or disciplinary action
arising solely from either:

1.  Requesting
or receiving, or failing to request or receive, prescription monitoring data
from the program's central database tracking system.

2.  Acting
or failing to act on the basis of the prescription monitoring data provided by
the program's central database tracking system.

K.  L.  Notwithstanding
any provision of this section to the contrary, medical practitioners or dispensers and their delegates are not in violation of this
section during any time period in which the controlled substances prescription
monitoring program's central database tracking system is suspended or is not
operational or available in a timely manner. If the program's central database
tracking system is not accessible, the medical practitioner or
dispenser or the medical practitioner's or dispenser's delegate
shall document the date and time the practitioner, dispenser
or delegate attempted to use the central database tracking system pursuant to a
process established by board rule.

L.  M.  The
board shall conduct an annual voluntary survey of program users to assess user
satisfaction with the program's central database tracking
system.  The survey may be conducted electronically.  On or before
December 1 of each year, the board shall provide a report of the survey results
to the president of the senate, the speaker of the house of representatives and
the governor and shall provide a copy of this report to the secretary of state.

M.  N.  This
section does not prohibit a medical practitioner regulatory board or the Arizona state board of pharmacy from obtaining and using
information from the program's central database tracking system. 

N.  O.  For
the purposes of this section: , 

1.  "Dispenser"
means a pharmacist who is licensed pursuant to title 32, chapter 18.

2.  "Emergency department"
means the unit within a hospital that is designed for the provision of
emergency services. END_STATUTE

Sec. 40.  Title 36, chapter 29, article 1, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 36-2930.06, to read:

START_STATUTE36-2930.06.  Substance
use disorder services fund; AHCCCS administration; use of monies

A.  The
substance use disorder services fund is established consisting of monies
appropriated to the fund, any gifts or donations to the fund and interest
earned on those monies.  The director shall administer the fund. 

B.  Monies in the fund:

1.  Do not revert to the state general
fund.

2.  Are exempt from the provisions of section
35‑190, relating to lapsing of appropriations.

3.  Are continuously appropriated.

C.  The administration shall enter into
agreements with one or more contractors for substance use disorder services
using monies from the substance use disorder services fund.  In addition to
terms and conditions the director deems appropriate, the agreement between the
administration and each contractor shall require that:

1.  The monies allocated in the agreement
not be used for persons who are eligible under title XIX or title XXI of the
social security act.  Preference shall be given to persons with lower household
incomes.

2.  The contractor coordinate benefits
provided under this section with any third parties that are legally responsible
for the cost of services.

3.  The contractor make payments to
providers based on contracts with providers or, in the absence of a contract,
at the capped fee schedule established by the administration.

4.  The contractor submit expenditure
reports monthly in a format determined by the director for reimbursement of
services provided under the agreement.  The agreement may also
provide for additional reimbursement for administering the agreement in an
amount not to exceed eight percent of the expenditures for services.

5.  The administration not be held
financially responsible to the contractor for any costs incurred by the
contractor in excess of the monies allocated in the agreement.

D.  The system shall act as payor of last
resort for persons who are eligible pursuant to this section.  On receipt of
services under this section, a person is deemed to have assigned to the system
all rights to any type of medical benefit to which the person is entitled.

E.  This section does not:

1.  Establish an entitlement for any
individual to receive any particular service.

2.  Establish a duty on the part of the
administration to provide services or spend monies in excess of the monies in
the fund.END_STATUTE

Sec. 41.  Arizona state board
of pharmacy; report; implementation of electronic prescribing tools

On or before
September 1, 2018, the director of the Arizona state board of pharmacy shall
provide to the governor, the president of the senate and the speaker of the
house of representatives a report regarding the ability of health care
providers to access and use electronic prescribing tools and comply with the
requirements of section 36‑2525, Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended by
this act.  A copy of the report shall be provided to the secretary of state.

Sec. 42.  Governor's office of
youth, faith and family; report

On or before
December 31, 2018, the governor's office of youth, faith and family shall
report to the governor, the president of the senate and the speaker of the
house of representatives on the feasibility of a statewide expansion of the
Arizona angel initiative.

Sec. 43.  Appropriation;
substance use disorder services fund

The sum of
$10,000,000 is appropriated from the state general fund in fiscal year 2017‑2018
to the substance use disorder services fund established by section 36‑2930.06,
Arizona Revised Statutes, as added by this act.

Sec. 44.  Appropriations;
department of health services; attorney general; opioid abuse prevention;
opioid education; exemption

A.  Notwithstanding
the requirements of section 44‑1531.02, Arizona Revised Statutes, the
following sums are appropriated to the following entities from the consumer
remediation subaccount of the consumer restitution and remediation revolving
fund established by section 44‑1531.02, Arizona Revised Statutes, in
fiscal year 2017‑2018 for the following purposes:

1.  $400,600
to the department of health services for the opioid abuse prevention campaign
established pursuant to section 36‑123, Arizona Revised Statutes, as
added by this act.

2.  $400,600
to the attorney general – department of law for the purpose of awarding
community grants for opioid education and prevention efforts.

B.  Monies
appropriated pursuant to subsection A of this section are exempt from section
35‑190, Arizona Revised Statutes, relating to lapsing of appropriations.

Sec. 45.  Applicability

Title 20,
chapter 26, Arizona Revised Statutes, as added by this act, applies to all
health care services plans as defined in section 20‑3401, Arizona Revised
Statutes, as added by this act, that are issued or renewed from and after
December 31, 2018.

