

M. Lee Allison, State Geologist of
Arizona and the Director of the Arizona Geological Survey, passed away on
August 16, 2016 at the age of sixty‑eight. 

Born in 1948, Lee spent his early
years in the Philadelphia area before moving with his family to Los Angeles. 
He was the first in his family to attend college, paying for his education with
scholarships, student loans and summer jobs.  Knowing from a young age that he
wanted to pursue a career in geology, he received his bachelor's degree at the
University of California, Riverside, his master's degree at San Diego State
University and his Ph.D. at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst.  

Dedicated to public service, Lee
transitioned to the public sector after working for fifteen years in the oil
industry.  As the dynamic leader of the geological surveys in Arizona
(2005-2016), Kansas (1999‑2004) and Utah (1989-1999), he sought to increase
the global impact of the research and outreach of these agencies.  Believing
that state geological surveys could transform the economic well‑being of
a state, Lee worked tirelessly to identify natural resources and better the
lives of the citizens of the states he served.

Lee was a visionary, active in the
interface between science and public policy throughout his career.  Recognizing
the potential of the powerful tool of geoinformatics, he became a world‑renowned
leader in the efforts to develop cyberinfrastructure for the earth sciences. 
In recent years, he shifted his focus from local to national and international,
involving himself with EarthCube, OneGeology and the Belmont Forum.  Lee's
commitment to the advancement of the geosciences and the betterment of this
world earned him the well-deserved respect and admiration of all who had the
privilege to work with him.

A strong advocate for the
advancement of women in the geosciences, Lee was an active member of the
Association for Women Geoscientists in Salt Lake City almost from the inception
of the chapter.  In spite of frequent criticism and significant resistance, Lee
remained unwavering in his commitment to the cause.

Among his many awards and honors,
Lee received the Public Service Award of the American Association of Petroleum
Geologists, the Tanya Atwater "Encourage" Award from the Association
for Women Geoscientists for promoting the role of women in the profession and
the American Institute of Professional Geologists John T. Galey Jr. Award for Public
Service. 

Devoted to his family, Lee will be
greatly missed by his wife, Ann Becker, brother, Mark Allison and sister,
Catherine Torrance.

Therefore

Be it
resolved by the Senate of the State of Arizona, the House of Representatives
concurring:

That the Members of the
Legislature express regret at the passing of M. Lee Allison and extend their
sympathies and condolences to his family and many friends.

