

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Title 28, chapter 3, article 4, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 28-678, to read:

START_STATUTE28-678.  City,
town or county critical health information program; decal; emergency
responders; fee; definitions

A.  A city, town or
county, by ordinance, may establish a program to provide emergency responders
with critical health information about program participants so that emergency
responders may aid program participants who are involved in motor vehicle
emergencies or accidents and who are unable to communicate with emergency
responders.

B.  A city, town or
county that establishes a critical health information program:

1.  In consultation with
interested parties, including local law enforcement agencies, fire departments
and emergency medical services personnel, shall design program materials,
giving consideration to program materials used by similar programs in other
states in order to maximize uniformity.  Program materials must include
all of the following:

(a)  A yellow decal with
a diameter of three and one‑half inches that reads "saving
lives" in its center, and an optional one‑half inch border listing
the issuing city, town or county, that is to be affixed to the rear driver's
side window of the program participant's vehicle.

(b)  A health
information card that provides space for a program participant to attach a
recent photograph and indicate the participant's name, emergency contact
information, physicians' names and contact information, medical conditions,
recent surgeries, allergies, medications and any other information that the
city, town or county deems relevant to emergency responders in the case of
emergency.

(c)  A yellow envelope
into which the health information card prescribed by subdivision
(b) of this paragraph is to be
inserted and placed into the program participant's glove compartment.

2.  Shall provide sufficient program
materials to the public and to State and local law enforcement agencies, which
shall also provide the information to the public.

3.  May charge program
participants a nominal fee for program costs in an amount to be determined by
the city, town or county.

C.  A yellow decal
described in subsection B of this section that is affixed to motor vehicle that
is involved in a motor vehicle accident or emergency:

1.  Serves as notice to
an emergency responder assisting the motor vehicle that the driver or any
passenger in the vehicle may be a program participant.

2.  Authorizes an
emergency responder at the scene of the accident or emergency to search the
glove compartment of the vehicle for a yellow program envelope described in
subsection B of this section.

D.  An emergency
responder may use the information contained in the yellow program envelope for
the following purposes:

1.  To identify a
program participant.

2.  To ascertain whether
the program participant has a medical condition that may impede communications
with the emergency responder.

3.  To communicate with
the program participant's emergency contacts about the location and general
condition of the program participant.

4.  To consider the
program participant's current medications and preexisting medical conditions
when emergency medical treatment is administered for any injury the participant
suffers. 

E.  An emergency
responder is not liable for any civil damages as a result of any acts or
omissions that do not amount to intentional misconduct or gross negligence in
response to incomplete, incorrect or outdated information.

F.  An emergency
responder is not liable for damage to the program participant's vehicle when
obtaining information.

G.  For the purposes of
this section:

1.  "Emergency
responder" means municipal, county or State law enforcement officers,
firefighters or emergency medical services personnel.

2.  "Program
participant" means an individual who participates in the critical health
information program. END_STATUTE

