

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Title 42, chapter 1, article 3, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 42-1116.02, to read:

START_STATUTE42-1116.02.  Department
of revenue tax fraud interdiction fund; uses

A.  The
department of revenue tax fraud interdiction fund is established consisting of
fines collected pursuant to section 42-1127, subsection b, paragraphs 5 and 6.

B.  the
director shall administer the fund.  Subject to legislative appropriation, the
director shall:

1.  Use
fifty percent of the monies in the fund to detect violations and enhance tax
fraud analytics used to detect violations pursuant to section 42-1127,
subsection b.

2.  Transfer
fifty percent of the monies in the fund to the attorney general for prosecuting
violations pursuant to section 42-1127, subsection b. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 42-1127, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE42-1127.  Criminal
violation; classification; place of trial; definitions

A.  It
is a class 4 felony to:

1.  Corruptly
or by force or threats of force or injury:

(a)  Attempt
to intimidate, impede or injure an employee of the department acting in an
official capacity.

(b)  Obstruct,
impede or attempt to obstruct or impede the administration of this title or
title 43.

2.  Attempt
by means of bribery, misrepresentation, intimidation or force or threats of
force to obstruct, delay or prevent the communication of information or
testimony relating to a violation of this title or title 43 to an employee or
officer of the department, or knowingly injure another personally or injure the
person's property on account of the person giving, personally or by any other
person, any such information or testimony to an employee of the department.

3.  Make,
forge, alter or counterfeit with the intent to defraud a stamp or meter
impression prepared or prescribed by the department under chapter 3 of this
title, or to knowingly utter, publish, pass or tender as true a false, altered,
forged or counterfeited stamp or meter impression, or to use a stamp provided
for and required by chapter 3 of this title which has already once been used, with
the intent to evade the tax imposed by chapter 3 of this title.

4.  Tamper
with, or cause to be tampered with, any metering machine authorized to be used
under chapter 3 of this title.

B.  
A first‑time violation of this subsection may be designated as a class 1
misdemeanor, but otherwise it is a class 5 felony to:

1.  Knowingly
fail to pay any tax administered pursuant to this article due or believed due
by the taxpayer with intent to evade the tax.

2.  Knowingly
prepare, present or aid, procure or advise in preparing or presenting any
return, affidavit, claim or other document which is fraudulent or is false as
to any material matter, whether or not the falsity or fraud is with the
knowledge or consent of the taxpayer authorized or required to present the
return, affidavit, claim or document.

3.  Simulate
or falsely or fraudulently execute or sign any license or other required
document, or cause the license or document to be falsely or fraudulently
executed or advise or aid in such execution, with the intent to conceal or
cover up a material fact relating to a tax administered pursuant to this
article.

4.  Knowingly
fail to file a return or supply required information, or falsify or conceal a
material fact, document or record, make a false, fictitious or fraudulent
statement or representation or make or use a false writing or document knowing
it to contain a false, fictitious or fraudulent statement or entry, with intent
that the department rely on the false, fictitious or fraudulent statement or
entry in determining tax liability under this article.

5.  Purchase,
install or use any automated sales suppression device or service or zapper or
phantom-ware with the intent to defeat or evade any tax administered pursuant
to this article that is due or believed to be due by the
taxpayer.  In addition, a person that is convicted of a violation of
this paragraph:

(a)  Is subject to a fine
of not more than one hundred thousand dollars or, if a corporation, not more
than five hundred thousand dollars.  Monies paid as fines shall be deposited in
the department of revenue tax fraud interdiction fund established by section
42-1116.02.

(b)  Is liable for all
taxes, fees, penalties and interest due as a result of the person's use of the
automated sales suppression device or service or zapper or phantom-ware.

(c)  Shall forfeit all
profits associated with the person's purchase or use of the automated sales
suppression device or service or zapper or phantom‑ware.

6.  Sell,
license, purchase, install, transfer, sell as a service, manufacture, develop
or possess any automated sales suppression device or service or zapper or
phantom-ware knowing that the purpose of the device is to defeat or evade any
tax administered pursuant to this article.  In addition, a person that is convicted
of a violation of this paragraph:

(a)  Is subject to a fine
of not more than one hundred thousand dollars or, if a corporation, not more
than five hundred thousand dollars.  Monies paid as fines shall be deposited in
the department of revenue tax fraud interdiction fund established by section
42-1116.02.

(b)  Is liable for all
taxes, fees, penalties and interest due as a result of the person's use of the
automated sales suppression device or service or zapper or phantom-ware.

(c)  Shall forfeit all
profits associated with the person's sale or use of the automated sales
suppression device or service or zapper or phantom‑ware.

C.  A
distributor as defined in section 42‑3001 who violates section 42‑3452,
subsection A, paragraph 2 is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.  If the
distributor is convicted of a second violation of section 42‑3452,
subsection A, paragraph 2, the department may revoke the distributor's license
issued pursuant to section 42‑3401.

D.  A
distributor as defined in section 42‑3001 who violates any provision of
section 42‑3401, section 42‑3452, subsection A, paragraph 1 or
section 42‑3456 is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.  If the distributor
is a licensee under section 42‑3401 and is convicted of a second
violation of section 42‑3456, the department may revoke the distributor's
license.

E.  It
is a class 3 felony for any person to:

1.  Except
as provided in section 42‑3457, transport, in an unstamped or unlawfully
stamped condition, for the purpose of sale ten thousand or more cigarettes that
were subject to the tax imposed by chapter 3, article 2, 6, 7 or 9 of this
title.

2.  Wilfully
sell or offer for sale, in an unstamped or unlawfully stamped condition, ten
thousand or more cigarettes that were subject to the tax imposed by chapter 3,
article 2, 6 or 7 of this title.

3.  Wilfully
sell or offer for sale off an Indian reservation ten thousand or more
cigarettes that are stamped for on‑reservation sales.

F.  For
the purposes of subsection E of this section, the possession or transportation
in this state at any time by any person, other than a licensed distributor, as
defined in section 42‑3001, of ten thousand or more cigarettes in an
unstamped or unlawfully stamped condition, other than in interstate shipment
consistent with federal contraband cigarette trafficking laws (18 United States
Code chapter 114), is presumptive evidence that the cigarettes:

1.  Are
possessed or transported for the purpose of sale.

2.  Are
subject to the taxes imposed by chapter 3, article 2, 6, 7 or 9 of this title.

G.  A
person who knowingly sells a luxury on which the tax has not been paid or
accounted for as required by chapter 3 of this title is guilty of a class 1
misdemeanor.

H.  A
retailer who possesses any package, bottle or other container containing a luxury
which that does not bear the stamps required
to be affixed by chapter 3 of this title is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.

I.  
A person is guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor who:

1.  Is
engaged in the business of selling a luxury, either at wholesale or retail, and
who knowingly refuses or fails to produce on demand by the department invoices
of all luxuries the person purchased or received within two years immediately
before the demand, unless the person shows by satisfactory proof that the
person is unable to do so for reasons beyond the person's control.

2.  Makes
a false entry on an invoice, package or container of luxuries, or who with
intent to avoid the taxes imposed by chapter 3 of this title presents a false
entry for inspection of the department.

3.  Knowingly
prevents or hinders the department from making a full inspection of any place
where a luxury is sold or stored, or knowingly prevents or hinders the
inspection of invoices, books, records or papers required to be kept.

4.  Violates
any provision of this article or an administrative rule adopted by the
department for which no other penalty is prescribed.

J.  The
place of trial for the offenses enumerated in this section is in the county of
residence or principal place of business of the defendant or
defendants.  If the defendant has no residence or principal place of
business in this state, the trial shall be held in Maricopa county.

K.  A
person who defrauds this state by violating any requirement under chapter 3 of
this title, with criminal intent to evade any such requirement, is guilty of a
class 4 felony and shall pay a penalty of three times the retail value of the
cigarettes involved.

L.  A
person who knowingly violates any requirement under chapter 3 of this title,
with the criminal intent to evade any such requirement, is guilty of a class 6
felony.

M.  A
person who knowingly sells or offers to sell off an Indian reservation more
than two thousand but less than ten thousand cigarettes that are stamped for on‑reservation
sales, with the criminal intent to evade the tax imposed by chapter 3 of this
title, is guilty of a class 5 felony.

N.  Any
distributor, as defined in section 42‑3001, who sells or possesses more
than two thousand cigarettes with false manufacturing labels or cigarettes with
counterfeit tax stamps, with the criminal intent to evade any requirement under
chapter 3 of this title, is guilty of a class 5 felony and shall pay a penalty
of:

1.  For
a first violation involving two thousand or more cigarettes, two thousand dollars
or three times the retail value of the cigarettes, whichever is greater.

2.  For
a subsequent violation involving two thousand or more cigarettes, fifty
thousand dollars or three times the retail value of the cigarettes, whichever
is greater.

O.  For
the purposes of this section:
,  

1.  "Automated
sales suppression device" means a computer software program that falsifies
the electronic records of electronic cash registers and other point-of-sale
systems, including transaction data and transaction reports.

2.  "Electronic
cash register" means an electronic or computer system that records a
register or supporting data for the purpose of computing, storing or processing
retail sales and other transaction data.

3.  "Luxury" means any
article, object or device on which a tax is imposed under chapter 3 of this
title.

4.  "Phantom-ware"
means hidden or concealed computer software or hardware of an electronic cash
register or other point-of-sale system that can create a second set of records
or eliminate or manipulate transaction records that may or may not be preserved
in digital formats in order to misrepresent the existence or the true record of
a transaction in the electronic cash register.

5.  "Point-of-sale
system" means an electronic device that is used to process card payments
at retail locations.

6.  "Transaction
data" means data relating to a commercial transaction that includes data
identifying each purchased item, the price for each item, a taxability
determination for each item, a segregated tax amount for each taxed item, the
amount of cash or credit tendered, the net amount of change returned to the
customer, the date and time of the purchase, the name, address and
identification number of the vendor and the receipt or invoice number of the
transaction.

7.  "Transaction
report" means any means or method of reporting, displaying or generating
transaction data.

8.  "ZAPPER":

(a)  MEANS A COMPUTER
SOFTWARE PROGRAM THAT FALSIFIES THE ELECTRONIC RECORDS OF ELECTRONIC CASH
REGISTERS OR OTHER POINT-OF-SALE SYSTEMS, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
TRANSACTION DATA AND TRANSACTION REPORTS.

(b)  INCLUDES THE SOFTWARE
PROGRAM, ANY DEVICE THAT CARRIES THE SOFTWARE PROGRAM OR AN INTERNET LINK TO
THE SOFTWARE PROGRAM.
END_STATUTE

