

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 41-608, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-608.  Veterans'
donations fund; grants

A.  The
veterans' donations fund is established consisting of monies, gifts and
contributions donated to the department and monies deposited pursuant to
sections 28‑2414, 28‑2428, 28‑2431, 28‑2447, 28‑2454,
28‑2473, 28‑2474, 28‑2475 and 43‑620.  The
department shall administer the fund. Monies in the fund are continuously
appropriated.  The monies in the fund are exempt from the provisions of section
35‑190 relating to lapsing of appropriations.  The department
shall adopt rules or policies for grants of less than five thousand dollars
that encourage as much competition as practicable. 

B.  The
director or the director's designee may solicit and receive donations,
including in‑kind donations, from the public for veterans.  The
director shall deposit, pursuant to sections 35‑146 and 35‑147, the
monetary donations in the veterans' donations fund.  

C.  Private
donations may qualify for the purposes of income tax credits under section 43‑1086.  The
director may receive donations in any amount, but donations that qualify for
tax credits are subject to the limits prescribed by section 43‑1086 and
this subsection.  Donations to the fund that otherwise qualify under
the tax credit limits prescribed by section 43‑1086 but that exceed a
combined total of one million dollars in any calendar year, on a first-come,
first-served basis, do not qualify for the income tax credits.  The
director shall provide the taxpayer a donation receipt, which shall include the
taxpayer's full name and address, the last four digits of the taxpayer's social
security number and the amount of the donation.  The director shall
designate on the donation receipt whether the donation qualifies under the
limits prescribed by section 43‑1086 and this subsection.  The
director shall send a record of receipts that qualify under this subsection to
the department of revenue.

D.  Monies in the fund, including the
aggregate amount authorized by the director for income tax credits under
subsection c of this section,
are subject to state auditing procedures.  Except for monies deposited pursuant
to sections 28‑2431 and 28‑2447, the donations may be used for the
benefit of the veterans within this state as grants, subject to chapter 24 of
this title, if applicable.

C.  E.  The director shall
establish a separate subaccount in the veterans' donations fund for the deposit
of monies received pursuant to section 28‑2431, subsection
C.  The monies in the subaccount shall be used for the construction
and maintenance of the enduring freedom memorial authorized pursuant to section
41‑1363 for placement in Wesley Bolin Plaza.

D.  F.  The director shall
establish a separate subaccount in the veterans' donations fund for the deposit
of monies received pursuant to section 28‑2447, subsection C.  The monies
in the subaccount shall be used for the benefit of women veterans in this
state, including providing shelter to homeless women veterans as grants,
subject to chapter 24 of this title, if applicable.

E.  G.  The director shall
establish a separate subaccount in the veterans' donations fund for the deposit
of monies received pursuant to section 28‑2454, subsection
C.  The first thirty‑two thousand dollars in the subaccount
shall be reimbursed to the person that provides the thirty‑two thousand
dollars pursuant to section 28‑2454, subsection A.  The director shall
annually allocate monies from the subaccount to a foundation that is qualified
under section 501(c)(3) of the United States internal revenue code for federal
income tax purposes and that is the nation's oldest and largest provider of
need-based scholarships to children of United States military members.  The
foundation must:

1.  Have
been in existence for at least fifty‑two years.

2.  Have
provided more than thirty-three thousand scholarships that are valued at almost
ninety million dollars.

3.  Have
a mission that includes honoring marines and educating their children.

4.  Award
scholarship monies to children of marines and navy corpsmen who were killed or
wounded in combat or who have demonstrated financial need.

F.  H.  The director shall
inventory and account for the use of any tangible personal property donated to
the fund.

G.  I.  On notice from the
director, the state treasurer shall invest and divest monies in the fund as
provided by section 35‑313, and monies earned from investment shall be
credited to the fund. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 41-608.04, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-608.04.  Military
family relief fund; advisory committee; use of fund monies; audit

A.  The
military family relief fund is established through December 31, 2018 2025.  The fund consists of private
donations, grants, bequests and any other monies received for that purpose. 
The department shall administer the fund. On notice from the director, the
state treasurer shall invest and divest monies in the fund as provided by
section 35‑313, and monies earned from investment shall be credited to
the fund.  The monies in the fund are continuously appropriated to
the department solely for the purposes described in this
section.  Any monies remaining unexpended and unencumbered on
December 31, 2018 2025 shall be transferred for deposit
in the veterans' donations fund established by section 41‑608.

B.  The
military family relief advisory committee is established to determine
appropriate uses of the monies in the military family relief fund as provided
by this section.  The advisory committee consists of the director or the
director's designee and twelve additional members, including widows and
widowers of military personnel who died in the line of duty, military retirees,
veterans who have a service-connected disability and their family members,
Arizona army and air national guard unit commanders and active and retired
senior enlisted military personnel. Except for the director, the governor shall
appoint the members based on recommendations by the director, the adjutant
general and commanders of military bases in this state. Appointed members serve
at the pleasure of the governor.  The advisory committee shall elect
a chairperson from among the appointed members.

C.  The
advisory committee shall:

1.  Establish
criteria for the use of monies in the fund.

2.  Establish
and revise as necessary the application process for financial assistance.

3.  Review
and evaluate applications.

4.  Make
other recommendations as necessary.

D.  The
advisory committee may establish a subcommittee, consisting of not more than
five members of the full committee, to recommend approval of a grant to an
applicant of not more than three thousand dollars.

E.  Notwithstanding
section 38‑431.03, the subcommittee may meet in executive session without
advance notice.  The full advisory committee may meet in executive session,
with notice pursuant to section 38‑431.02, to review and evaluate
applications or review recommendations of the
subcommittee.  Applications for financial assistance and all
committee considerations and evaluations of the applications are confidential.

F.  The
monies in the fund shall be used to provide financial assistance pursuant to
this subsection.  The service member of an applying family must have been
deceased, wounded or injured or become seriously ill after September 11, 2001,
been deployed from a military base in this state, claimed this state as the
service member's home of record or been a member of the Arizona national guard
at the time of deployment.  If discharged from military service, the
service member must have been discharged under honorable
conditions.  The assistance shall be based on financial need up to
twenty thousand dollars per family.  Eligible assistance is as
follows:

1.  Widows,
widowers or dependent children of service members who died in the line of duty
in a combat zone or a zone where the person was receiving hazardous duty pay
may apply for a stipend for living expenses for up to six
months.  For the purposes of the stipend, qualifying living expenses
are residential mortgage, rent and utility payments and other basic living
expenses.  Payments with respect to any deceased person under this
paragraph are limited to a total of twenty thousand dollars.

2.  An
immediate family member may apply for payment of costs of temporary residence
near the medical facility where the service member or former service member is
being treated, including living, travel and housing
expenses.  Payments may be payable in monthly installments as long as
the person is hospitalized or receiving medical care or rehabilitation services
as authorized by military or veterans' medical personnel.

3.  An
immediate family member, service member or former service member may apply for:

(a)  Living
expenses.

(b)  Other
appropriate expenses as determined by the military family relief advisory
committee.

G.  The
director may allocate up to five percent of the donations received for
administering the fund and the financial assistance program under this section,
including the hiring of an employee to process applications and provide support
to the committee.  The department shall provide reasonable office
space and other necessary resources for the employee.

H.  The
director shall receive private donations for deposit in the fund and issue
receipts to the donors.  Private donations may qualify for the purposes of
income tax credits under section 43‑1086.  The director may
receive donations in any amount, but donations that qualify for tax credits are
subject to the limits prescribed by section 43‑1086.  Donations to the
fund that otherwise qualify under the tax credit limits prescribed by section
43‑1086 but that exceed a combined total of one million dollars in any
calendar year, on a first come first served basis, do not qualify for the
income tax credits.  The director shall provide the taxpayer a
donation receipt, which shall include the taxpayer's full name and address, the
last four digits of the taxpayer's social security number and the amount of the
donation.  The director shall designate on the donation receipt
whether the donation qualifies under the limits prescribed by this subsection
and section 43‑1086.  The director shall send a record of
receipts that qualify under this subsection to the department of revenue.

I.  H.  On or before March 31
of each year, the director shall provide for an audit by an independent
certified public accountant of the fund and of the aggregate amount
authorized by the director for income tax credits under subsection H of this
section.  The
director shall promptly submit a certified copy of the audit to the auditor
general.  The auditor general may make further audits and
examinations as necessary and may take appropriate action relating to the audit
or examination pursuant to chapter 7, article 10.1 of this title.  If
the auditor general does not take further action within thirty days after the
audit is filed, the audit is considered to be sufficient.  The
director shall pay the costs of the certified public accountant and the auditor
general from the administration allocation under subsection G of this section. END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Section 43-1086, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE43-1086.  Credit
for donation to the veterans' donations fund

A.  For
taxable years beginning from and after December 31, 2007 2017 through December 31, 2018 2025, a credit is allowed against the
taxes imposed by this title for cash contributions made by a taxpayer during
the taxable year to the military
family relief veterans' donations fund established by section 41‑608.04 41-608.  The amount of the credit is the
lowest of the following amounts, as applicable:

1.  The
total amount of contributions to the fund by the taxpayer during the taxable
year.

2.  Two
hundred dollars of contributions during the taxable year by a taxpayer filing
as a single individual or a head of household.

3.  Four
hundred dollars of contributions during the taxable year by a married couple
filing a joint return.

4.  The
taxpayer's tax liability for the taxable year.

B.  A
husband and wife who file separate returns for a taxable year in which they
could have filed a joint return may each claim only one-half of the tax credit
that would have been allowed on a joint return. END_STATUTE

Sec. 4.  Laws 2008, chapter 243, section 6, as
amended by Laws 2012, chapter 281, section 2, is amended to read.

Sec. 6.  Delayed repeal

A.  Section
41-608.04, Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended by this act, is repealed from and after
December 31, 2018 2025.

B.  Section
43-1086, Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended by this act, is repealed from and after
December 31, 2018 2025.

Sec. 5.  Purpose

Pursuant
to section 43-223, Arizona Revised Statutes, the purpose of the income tax
credit for donations to the veterans' donations fund under section 43-1086,
Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended by this act, is to encourage contributions
for the benefit of needy veterans of all eras.

Sec. 6.  Effective date;
applicability

A.  Sections
41-608 and 41-608.04, Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended by this act, are
effective from and after December 31, 2017.

B.  Section
43-1086, Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended by this act, is effective and
applies to taxable years beginning from and after December 31, 2017.

