

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 49-171, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE49-171.  Definitions

In this
article, unless the context otherwise requires:

1.  "Characterization"
means a process to determine the nature, degree and extent of contaminants at a
site or a portion of a site
pursuant to this article.

2.  "Contaminant"
means any substance that has been released to the environment and that
qualifies as any of the following:

(a)  A
hazardous substance as defined in section 49‑201.

(b)  A
pollutant as defined in section 49‑201.

3.  "Engineering
control" has the same meaning prescribed in section 49‑151.

4.  "Environmental
claim" means a claim for defense or indemnity submitted under a general liability
insurance policy by an insured in response to a claim of potential liability
for bodily injury or property damage arising from a release of pollutants onto
or into land, air or water.

5.  "Institutional
control" has the same meaning prescribed in section 49‑151.

6.  "Insured"
means any person who is included as a named insured on a general liability
insurance policy and who has or had a property interest in a site in this state
that involves an environmental claim.

7.  "Person"
has the same meaning prescribed in section 49‑201.

8.  "Remedial
action" means any action to investigate, monitor, assess, evaluate,
develop, implement or operate or any other action taken in order to prevent,
minimize or mitigate damage to the public health or welfare or the environment.

8.  9.  "Remediation" means
action taken to address a contaminant by reducing the level of the contaminant
in the environment or preventing or reducing exposure to the contaminant.

9.  10.  "Site" means the areal
extent of contamination.

10.  11.  "Source" means a site or
portion of a site where a contaminant is or may be released to waters of the
state.

11.  12.  "Waters of the state"
has the same meaning prescribed in section 49‑201. END_STATUTE

