

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 43-1147, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE43-1147.  Situs
of sales of other than tangible personal property; definitions

A.  Except
as provided by subsection B of this section, sales, other than sales of
tangible personal property, are in this state if either of the following
applies:

1.  The
income
producing income-producing activity is performed in this
state.

2.  The
income
producing income-producing activity is performed both in and
outside this state and a greater proportion of the income producing income-producing activity is performed in this
state than in any other state, based on costs of performance.

B.  For
taxable years beginning from and after December 31, 2013, a multistate service
provider may elect to treat sales from services as being in this state based on
a combination of income
producing income‑producing
activity sales
and market sales.  If the election under this subsection is made pursuant to
subsection C of this section, the sales of services that are in this state
shall be determined for taxable years beginning from and after:

1.  December
31, 2013 through December 31, 2014,
by the sum of the following:

(a)  Eighty‑five
per
cent percent of the market sales.

(b)  Fifteen
per
cent percent of the income producing income‑producing activity sales.

2.  December
31, 2014 through December 31, 2015,
by the sum of the following:

(a)  Ninety
per
cent percent of the market sales.

(b)  Ten
per
cent percent of the income producing income-producing activity sales.

3.  December
31, 2015 through December 31, 2016,
by the sum of the following:

(a)  Ninety‑five
per
cent percent of the market sales.

(b)  Five
per
cent percent of the income producing income-producing activity sales.

4.  December
31, 2016, by one hundred per cent percent of the market sales.

C.  A
multistate service provider may elect to treat sales from services as being in
this state under subsection B of this section as follows:

1.  The
election must be made on the taxpayer's timely filed original income tax
return.  The election is:

(a)  Effective
retroactively for the full taxable year of the income tax return on which the
election is made.

(b)  Binding
on the taxpayer for at least five consecutive taxable years, regardless of
whether the taxpayer no longer meets the percentage threshold of a multistate
service provider during that time period, except as provided by paragraph 2 of
this subsection.  To continue with the election after the five consecutive
taxable years, the taxpayer must meet the qualifications to be considered a
multistate service provider and renew the election for another five consecutive
taxable years.

2.  During
the election period, the election may be terminated as follows:

(a)  Without
the permission of the department on the acquisition or merger of the taxpayer.

(b)  With
the permission of the department before the expiration of five consecutive
taxable years.

D.  For
a multistate service provider under subsection E, paragraph 3, subdivision (b)
of this section, an election under subsection B of this section is limited to
the treatment of sales for educational services.

E.  For
the purposes of this section:

1.  "Income producing income-producing activity sales" means the
total sales from services that are sales in this state under subsection A of
this section.

2.  "Market
sales" means the total sales from services for which the purchaser
received the benefit of the service in this state.

3.  "Multistate
service provider" means either: 

(a)  A
taxpayer that derives more than eighty‑five per cent percent of its sales from services
provided to purchasers who receive the benefit of the service outside this
state in the taxable year of election, and includes all taxpayers required to
file a combined report pursuant to section 43‑942 and all members of an
affiliated group included in a consolidated return pursuant to section 43‑947.  In
calculating the eighty‑five per cent percent, sales to students receiving educational
services at campuses physically located in this state shall be excluded from
the calculation. for
the purposes of this subdivision, "sales from services" includes
sales derived from credit and charge card receivables, including fees, merchant
discounts, interchanges, interest and related revenue.

(b)  A
taxpayer that is a regionally accredited institution of higher education with
at least one university campus in this state that has more than two thousand
students residing on the campus, and includes all taxpayers required to file a
combined report pursuant to section 43‑942 and all members of an
affiliated group included in a consolidated return pursuant to section 43‑947.

4.  "Received
the benefit of the service in this state" means the services are received
by the purchaser in this state.  If the state where the services are received
cannot be readily determined, the services are considered to be received at the
home of the customer or, in the case of a business, the office of the customer
from which the services were ordered in the regular course of the customer's
trade or business.  If the ordering location cannot be determined, the services
are considered to be received at the home or office of the customer to which
the services were billed.

5.  "Sales
for educational services" means tuition and fees required for enrollment
and fees required for courses of instruction, transcripts and graduation. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Effective date

This act is
effective from and after December 31, 2019. 

