

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 12-101, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE12-101.  Justices;
number; term; election

The supreme
court shall consist of seven justices.  The term of office of each
justice shall be six two years and shall take effect on the
first Monday in January of the year in which it begins.  Justices
shall be elected at the general election next preceding the expiration of a
term of office. 

Sec. 2.  Section 12-102, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE12-102.  Jurisdiction
and duties; court appointments; contract and volunteer service providers;
background investigations; fingerprinting

A.  The
supreme court shall discharge the duties imposed and exercise the jurisdiction
conferred by the constitution and by law.

B.  As
a condition of appointment to any paid position in the judicial department that
is defined as a noncriminal justice agency under federal law, including nomination
for judicial office by the commissions on appellate and trial court
appointments pursuant to article VI, sections 37 and 41, Constitution of
Arizona, the
court shall require each applicant to furnish a full set of fingerprints to
enable the court to conduct a criminal background investigation to determine
the suitability of the applicant.  The court shall submit the
completed applicant fingerprint card to the department of public safety.  The
applicant shall bear the cost of obtaining the applicant's criminal history
record information.  The cost shall not exceed the actual cost of
obtaining the applicant's criminal history record information.  Applicant
criminal history records checks shall be conducted pursuant to section 41‑1750
and Public Law 92‑544.  The department of public safety is
authorized to exchange the submitted applicant fingerprint card information
with the federal bureau of investigation for a national criminal history
records check.

C.  The
court may require each person who provides contract or volunteer services in
the judicial department that is defined as a noncriminal justice agency under
federal law to furnish a full set of fingerprints to enable the court to
conduct a criminal background investigation.  The court shall submit the
person's completed fingerprint card to the department of public
safety.  The person shall bear the cost of obtaining the person's
criminal history record information.  The cost shall not exceed the
actual cost of obtaining the person's criminal history record
information.  Criminal history records checks shall be conducted
pursuant to section 41‑1750 and Public Law 92‑544.  The
department of public safety is authorized to exchange the person's submitted
fingerprint card information with the federal bureau of investigation for a
national criminal history records check. END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Section 12-120.01, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE12-120.01.  Qualifications
of judges; terms; ballots; vacancies

A.  A
judge of the court of appeals shall be:

1.  Not
less than thirty years of age.

2.  Of
good moral character.

3.  A
qualified elector of the county of his
the
judge's residence,
and a resident of such county for not less than three years next preceding
taking office.

4.  A
resident of the division in which he
the
judge is
elected.

5.  Admitted
to the practice of law in the state of Arizona for not less than five years
next preceding taking office.

6.  A
resident of Arizona for not less than five years next preceding taking office.

B.  Except
for the initial term, each judge shall hold office for a term of six two years to commence on the first
Monday in January following his
retention the judge's election and until his the judge's successor is appointed and qualified elected.  Each judge shall be appointed by
the governor and serve an initial term pursuant to article VI, section 37,
Constitution of Arizona. The names of all candidates for judge of the court
of appeals shall be placed on the regular ballot with partisan or other
designation and the court and the title of the office.

C.  the
governor shall fill any vacancy in office by appointing a person of the same
political party as the person vacating the office to serve until the election
and qualification of a successor At the next succeeding general election.  END_STATUTE

Sec. 4.  Section 12-120.02, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE12-120.02.  Election
of judges

A.  In
division 1, of the fifteen judges who are on the bench on July 1, 1995, ten of
the judges shall be residents of and elected for retention from Maricopa county and five of
the judges shall be residents of the remaining counties in the division and shall
be elected for
retention by
the voters of the counties in division 1, excluding Maricopa
county.  If the sixteenth judge is a resident of Maricopa county, the
judge shall be elected for
retention by
the voters of Maricopa county.  If the sixteenth judge is not a
resident of Maricopa county, the judge shall be elected for retention by the voters of the counties in
division 1, excluding Maricopa county.

B.  In
division 2, four of the judges shall be residents of and elected from Pima
county and two of the judges shall be residents of the remaining counties in
the division and shall be elected by the voters of the counties in division 2,
excluding Pima county. END_STATUTE

Sec. 5.  Section 12-120.07, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE12-120.07.  Opinions;
publication

A.  The
chief judge shall assign three of the judges to each department, and such
assignment may be changed by him the chief judge from time to time.  Each of the
departments shall have the power to hear and determine causes and all questions
arising therein.  The presence of three judges shall be necessary to
transact any business in either of the departments, ;  except such as may be done in
chambers and except as may be otherwise permitted by law.  The
opinions of a division or of a department of the court of appeals shall be in
writing, the grounds stated, and shall be concurred in by a majority of a
department if heard by a department or of the division if heard by the
division.  An opinion of a division or a department of a division
shall be the opinion of the court of appeals.

B.  The
opinions of the court of appeals shall be published and distributed in the same
manner as provided for the publication and distribution of opinions of the
supreme court. 

C.  Not
later than sixty days preceding the regular primary election for the retention of an appellate court judge, the
commission on judicial performance review shall prepare and publish on its
website a list of the decisions of that appellate court judge including the
decision's official citation and an electronic copy of the entire text of the
decision. END_STATUTE

Sec. 6.  Repeal

A.  Section
12-131, Arizona Revised Statutes, is repealed.

B.  Title
12, chapter 23, Arizona Revised Statutes, is repealed.

Sec. 7.  Section 16-502, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE16-502.  Form
and contents of ballot

A.  Ballots
shall be printed with black ink on white paper of sufficient thickness to
prevent the printing thereon from being discernible from the back, and the same
type shall be used for the names of all candidates.  The ballots shall be
headed "official ballot" in bold‑faced plain letters, with a
heavy rule above and below the heading.  Immediately below shall be placed the
words "type of election, (date of election)" and the name of the
county and state in which the election is held.  The name or number of the
precinct in which the election is held shall be placed on the ballot in a
uniform location for all ballots.  No other matter shall be placed or printed
at the head of any ballot, except above the heading there may be a stub that
contains the words "stub no. _____, register no. _____, to be torn off by
inspector."  The stub shall be separated from the ballot by a perforated
line, so that it may be easily detached from the ballot. Instructions to the
voter on marking the ballot may be printed below the heading.  The official
ballots shall be bound together in blocks of not less than five nor more than
one hundred.

B.  Immediately
below the ballot heading shall be placed the following:

 "Section One

Partisan Ballot

1.  Put
a mark according to the instructions next to the name of each candidate for
each partisan office for whom you wish to vote.

2.  If
you wish to vote for a person whose name is not printed on the ballot, write
such name in the blank space provided on the ballot or write‑in envelope
and put a mark according to the instructions next to the name so written. " 

C.  Immediately
below the instructions for voting in section one there shall be placed in
columns the names of the candidates of the several political parties.  Next to
each candidate's name there shall be printed in bold‑faced letters the
name of the political party.  At the head of each column shall be printed the
names of the offices to be filled with the name of each office being of uniform
type size.  At the head of each column shall be printed in the following order
the names of candidates for:

1.  Presidential
electors, which shall be enclosed in a bracketed list and next to the bracketed
list shall be printed in bold type the surname of the presidential candidate, and the surname of the vice‑presidential vice presidential candidate who is seeking election
jointly with the presidential candidate shall be listed directly below the name
of the presidential candidate.  The indicator for the selection of
the presidential and vice-presidential vice presidential candidates shall be directly next
to the surname of the presidential candidate, and one mark directly next to a
presidential candidate's surname shall be counted as a vote for each elector in
the bracketed list next to the presidential and vice‑presidential
candidates.

2.  United
States senator.

3.  Representatives
in Congress.

4.  The
several state offices.

5.  The
several county and precinct offices.

6.  Justices of the supreme
court standing for election pursuant to article VI, section 4, Constitution of
Arizona.

7.  Judges of the court of
appeals standing for election pursuant to section 12-120.01.

8.  Judges of the superior court
standing for election pursuant to article VI, section 12, Constitution of
Arizona.

D.  The
names of candidates for the offices of state senator and state representative
along with the district number shall be placed within the heading of each
column to the right of the office name for state offices and immediately below
the candidates for the office of governor.  The number of the supervisorial
district of which a candidate is a nominee shall be printed within the heading
of each column to the right of the name of the office.

E.  The
lists of the candidates of the several parties shall be arranged with the names
of the parties in descending order according to the votes cast for governor for
that county in the most recent general election for the office of governor,
commencing with the left‑hand column.  In the case of political parties which that did not have candidates on the
ballot in the last general election, such parties shall be listed in
alphabetical order below the parties which that did have candidates on the ballot
in the last general election.  The names of all candidates nominated
under section 16‑341 shall be placed in a single column below that of the
recognized parties.  Next to the name of each candidate, in parentheses, shall
be printed a three‑letter abbreviation that is taken from the three words
prescribed in the candidate's certificate of nomination.

F.  Immediately
below the designation of the office to be voted for shall appear the words:
"Vote for not more than _________" (insert the number to be elected).

G.  In
each column at the right of the name of each candidate and on the same line
there shall be a place for the voter to put a mark.  Below the name of the last
named candidate for each office there shall be as many blank lines as there are
offices of the same title to be filled, with a place for the voter to put a
mark unless write‑in envelopes are provided for that purpose.  Upon On the blank line the voter may write
the name of any person for whom he
the
voter desires
to vote whose name is not printed, and next to the name so written he the voter shall designate his the voter's choice by a mark as in the case of
printed names.

H.  When
there are two or more candidates of the same political party for the same
office, or more than one candidate for a judicial office, the names of all such
candidates shall be so alternated on the ballots used in each election district
that the name of each candidate shall appear substantially an equal number of
times in each possible location.  If there are fewer or the same number of
candidates seeking office than the number to be elected, the rotation of names
is not required and the names shall be placed in alphabetical order.

I.  Immediately
below section one of the ballot shall be placed the following:

 "Section Two

Nonpartisan
Ballot

1.  Put
a mark according to the instructions next to the name of each candidate for
each nonpartisan office for whom you wish to vote.

2.  If
you wish to vote for a person whose name is not printed on the ballot, write
such name in the blank space provided on the ballot or write‑in envelope
and put a mark according to the instructions next to the name so written.

3.  Put
a mark according to the instructions next to the word 'yes' (or for) for each
proposition or question you wish to be adopted.  Put a mark according to the
instructions next to the word 'no' (or against) for each proposition or
question you wish not to be adopted." 

J.  Immediately
below the instructions for voting in section two shall be placed the names of
the candidates for judges
of the superior court standing for election pursuant to article VI, section 12,
Constitution of Arizona,
school district officials,
justices of the supreme court, judges of the court of appeals, judges of the
superior court standing for retention or rejection pursuant to article VI,
section 38, Constitution of Arizona, and other nonpartisan officials in a column or in
columns without partisan or other designation except the title of office in an
order determined by the officer in charge of the election.

K.  Immediately
below the offices listed in subsection J of this section, the ballot shall
contain a separate heading of any nonpartisan office for a vacant unexpired
term and shall include the expiration date of the term of the vacated office.

L.  All
proposed constitutional amendments and other propositions or questions to be
submitted to the voters shall be printed immediately below the names of
candidates for nonpartisan positions in such order as the secretary of state,
or if a city or town election, the city or town clerk, designates.  Placement
of county and local charter amendments, propositions or questions shall be
determined by the officer in charge of the election. Except as provided by
section 19‑125, each proposition or question shall be followed by the
words "yes" and "no" or "for ______" and
"against ______" as the nature of the proposition or question
requires, and at the right of and next to each of such words shall be a place
for the voter to put a mark according to the instructions that is similar in
size to those places appearing opposite the names of the candidates, in which
the voter may indicate his vote for or against such proposition or question by
a mark as defined in section 16‑400. 

M.  Instead
of printing the official and descriptive titles or the full text of each
measure or question on the official ballot, the officer in charge of elections
may print phrases on the official ballot that contain all of the following:

1.  The
number of the measure in reverse type and at least twelve point type.

2.  The
designation of the measure as prescribed by section 19‑125, subsection C
or as a question, proposition or charter amendment, followed by the words
"relating to..." and inserting the subject.

3.  Either
the statement prescribed by section 19‑125, subsection D that describes
the effects of a "yes" vote and a "no" vote or, for other
measures, the text of the question or proposition.

4.  The
words "yes" and "no" or "for" and
"against", as may be appropriate and a place for the voter to put a
mark.

N.  For
any ballot printed pursuant to subsection M of this section, the instructions
on the official ballot shall direct the voter to the full text of the official
and descriptive titles and the questions and propositions as printed on the
sample ballot and posted in the polling place. END_STATUTE

Sec. 8.  Section 16-901, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE16-901.  Definitions

In this
chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:

1.  "Advertisement"
means information or materials, other than nonpaid social media messages, that
are mailed, e‑mailed, posted, distributed, published, displayed,
delivered, broadcasted or placed in a communication medium and that are for the
purpose of influencing an election.

2.  "Affiliate"
means any organization that controls, is controlled by or is under common
control with a corporation, limited liability company or labor organization.

3.  "Agent"
means any person who has actual authority, either express or implied, to
represent or make decisions on behalf of another person.

4.  "Ballot
measure expenditure" means an expenditure made by a person that expressly
advocates the support or opposition of a clearly identified ballot measure.

5.  "Best
effort" means that a committee treasurer or treasurer's agent makes at
least one written effort, including an attempt by e-mail, text message, private
message through social media or other similar communication, or at least one
oral effort that is documented in writing to identify the contributor of an
incomplete contribution.

6.  "Calendar
quarter" means a period of three consecutive calendar months ending on
March 31, June 30, September 30 or December 31.

7.  "Candidate"
means an individual who receives contributions or makes expenditures or who
gives consent to another person to receive contributions or make expenditures
on behalf of that individual in connection with the candidate's nomination, or election or retention for any public office.

8.  "Candidate
committee" includes the candidate.

9.  "Clearly
identified candidate" means that the name or a description, image,
photograph or drawing of the candidate appears or the identity of the candidate
is otherwise apparent by unambiguous reference.

10.  "Committee"
means a candidate committee, a political action committee or a political party.

11.  "Contribution"
means any money, advance, deposit or other thing of value that is made to a
person for the purpose of influencing an election.  Contribution includes:

(a)  A
contribution that is made to retire campaign debt from a previous election
cycle.

(b)  Money
or the fair market value of anything that is directly or indirectly provided to
an elected official for the specific purpose of defraying the expense of
communications with constituents.

(c)  The
full purchase price of any item from a committee.

(d)  A
loan that is made to a committee for the purpose of influencing an election, to
the extent the loan remains outstanding.

12.  "Control"
means to possess, directly or indirectly, the power to direct or to cause the
direction of the management or policies of another organization, whether
through voting power, ownership, contract or otherwise.

13.  "Coordinate",
"coordinated" or "coordination" means the coordination of
an expenditure as proscribed prescribed by section 16‑922.

14.  "Coordinated
party expenditures" means expenditures that are made by a political party
to directly pay for goods or services on behalf of its nominee.

15.  "District
office" means an elected office established or organized pursuant to title
15 or 48.

16.  "Earmarked"
means a designation, instruction or encumbrance between the transferor of a
contribution and a transferee that requires the transferee to make a
contribution to a clearly identified candidate.

17.  "Election"
means any election for any ballot measure in this state or any candidate
election during a primary, general, recall, special or runoff election for any
office in this state other than a federal office and a political party office
prescribed by chapter 5, article 2 of this title.

18.  "Election
cycle" means the two-year period between successive statewide general
elections or, for cities and towns, the two-year period between the scheduled
date of the city's or town's second, runoff or general election and the
scheduled date of the immediately following second, runoff or general election,
however designated by the city or town.  For purposes of a recall
election, "election cycle" means the period between issuance of a
recall petition serial number and the latest of the following:

(a)  The
date of the recall election that is called pursuant to section 19-209.

(b)  The
date that a resignation is accepted pursuant to section 19‑208.

(c)  The
date that the receiving officer provides notice pursuant to section 19‑208.01
that the number of signatures is insufficient.

19.  "Employee"
means an individual who is entitled to compensation for labor or services
performed for the individual's employer.

20.  "Employer"
means any person that pays compensation to and directs the labor or services of
any individual in the course of employment.

21.  "Enforcement
officer" means the attorney general or the county, city or town attorney
with authority to collect fines or issue penalties with respect to a given
election pursuant to section 16‑938. 

22.  "Entity"
means a corporation, limited liability company, labor organization,
partnership, trust, association, organization, joint venture, cooperative,
unincorporated organization or association or other organized group that
consists of more than one individual.

23.  "Excess
contribution" means a contribution that exceeds the applicable
contribution limits for a particular election.

24.  "Exclusive
insurance contract" means an insurance producer's contract with an insurer
that does either of the following:

(a)  Prohibits
the producer from soliciting insurance business for any other insurer.

(b)  Requires
a first right of first refusal on all lines of insurance
business written by the insurer and solicited by the producer.

25.  "Expenditure"
means any purchase, payment or other thing of value that is made by a person
for the purpose of influencing an election.

26.  "Family
contribution" means any contribution that is provided to a candidate's
committee by the parent, grandparent, aunt, uncle, child or sibling of the
candidate or the candidate's spouse, including the spouse of any of the listed
family members, regardless of whether the relation is established by marriage
or adoption.

27.  "Filing
officer" means the secretary of state or the county, city or town officer
in charge of elections for that jurisdiction who accepts statements and reports
for those elections pursuant to section 16‑928.

28.  "Firewall"
means a written policy that precludes one person from sharing information with
another person.

29.  "Identification"
or "identify" means:

(a)  For
an individual, the individual's first and last name, residence location or
street address and occupation and the name of the individual's primary
employer.

(b)  For
any other person, the person's full name and physical location or street
address.

30.  "Incomplete
contribution" means any contribution that is received by a committee for
which the contributor's complete identification has not been obtained.

31.  "Independent
expenditure" means an expenditure by a person, other than a candidate
committee, that complies with both of the following:

(a)  Expressly
advocates the election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate.

(b)  Is
not made in cooperation or consultation with or at the request or suggestion of
the candidate or the candidate's agent.

32.  "In-kind
contribution" means a contribution of goods, services or anything of value
that is provided without charge or at less than the usual and normal charge.

33.  "Insurance
producer" means a person that:

(a)  Is
required to be licensed to sell, solicit or negotiate insurance.

(b)  Has
an exclusive insurance contract with an insurer.

34.  "Itemized"
means that each contribution received or expenditure made is set forth
separately.

35.  "Labor
organization" means any employee representation organization that exists
for the purpose of dealing with employers concerning grievances, labor
disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours of employment or other conditions of
employment.

36.  "Legislative
office" means the office of representative in the state house of
representatives or senator in the state senate.

37.  "Mega
PAC status" means official recognition that a political action committee
has received contributions from five hundred or more individuals in amounts of
ten dollars or more in the four-year period immediately before application to
the secretary of state.

38.  "Nominee"
means a candidate who prevails in a primary election for partisan office and
includes the nominee's candidate committee.

39.  "Person"
means an individual or a candidate, nominee, committee, corporation, limited
liability company, labor organization, partnership, trust, association,
organization, joint venture, cooperative or unincorporated organization or
association.

40.  "Personal
monies" means any of the following:

(a)  Assets
to which the individual or individual's spouse has either legal title or an
equitable interest.

(b)  Salary
and other earned income from bona fide employment of the individual or
individual's spouse. 

(c)  Dividends
and proceeds from the sale of investments of the individual or individual's
spouse.

(d)  Bequests
to the individual or individual's spouse. 

(e)  Income
to the individual or individual's spouse from revocable trusts for which the
individual or individual's spouse is a beneficiary.

(f)  Gifts
of a personal nature to the individual or individual's spouse that would have
been given regardless of whether the individual became a candidate or accepted
a contribution.

(g)  The
proceeds of loans obtained by the individual or individual's spouse that are
secured by collateral or security provided by the individual or individual's
spouse.

(h)  Family
contributions.

41.  "Political
action committee" means an entity that is required to register as a
political action committee pursuant to section 16-905.

42.  "Political
party" means a committee that meets the requirements for recognition as a
political party pursuant to chapter 5 of this title.

43.  "Primary
purpose" means an entity's predominant purpose.  Notwithstanding any other
law or rule, an entity is not organized for the primary purpose of influencing
an election if all of the following apply at the time the contribution or
expenditure is made:

(a)  The
entity has tax exempt status under section 501(a) of the internal revenue code.

(b)  Except
for a religious organization, assembly or institution, the entity has properly
filed a form 1023 or form 1024 with the internal revenue service or the
equivalent successor form designated by the internal revenue service.

(c)  The
entity's tax exempt status has not been denied or revoked by the internal
revenue service.

(d)  The
entity remains in good standing with the corporation commission.

(e)  The
entity has properly filed a form 990 with the internal revenue service or the
equivalent successor form designated by the internal revenue service in
compliance with the most recent filing deadline established by internal revenue
service regulations or policies.

44.  "Retention"
means the election process by which a superior court judge, appellate court
judge or supreme court justice is retained in office as prescribed by article
VI, section 38 or 40, Constitution of Arizona.

45. 44.  "Separate segregated
fund" means a fund established by a corporation, limited liability
company, labor organization or partnership that is required to register as a
political action committee.

46. 45.  "Social media
messages" means forms of communication, including internet sites for
social networking or blogging, through which users create a personal profile
and participate in online communities to share information, ideas and personal
messages.

47. 46.  "Sponsor" means
any person that establishes, administers or contributes financial support to
the administration of a political action committee or that has common or
overlapping membership or officers with that political action committee.

48. 47.  "Standing
committee" means a political action committee or political party that is
active in more than one reporting jurisdiction in this state and that files a
statement of organization in a format prescribed by the secretary of state.

49. 48.  "Statewide office"
means the office of governor, secretary of state, state treasurer, attorney
general, superintendent of public instruction, corporation commissioner or mine
inspector.

50. 49.  "Surplus monies"
means those monies of a terminating committee that remain after all of the
committee's expenditures have been made, all debts have been extinguished and
the committee ceases accepting contributions. END_STATUTE

Sec. 9.  Section 16-905, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE16-905.  Committee
qualification; requirements; exemption; adjustments

A.  A
candidate for election or
retention
shall register as a candidate committee if the candidate receives contributions
or makes expenditures, in any combination, of at least one thousand dollars in
connection with that candidacy.

B.  An
entity shall register as a political action committee if both of the following
apply:

1.  The
entity is organized for the primary purpose of influencing the result of an
election.

2.  The
entity knowingly receives contributions or makes expenditures, in any
combination, of at least one thousand dollars in connection with any election
during a calendar year.

C.  A
filing officer or enforcement officer shall make a rebuttable presumption that
an entity is organized for the primary purpose of influencing the result of an
election if the entity meets any of the following:

1.  Except
for a religious organization, assembly or institution, claims tax exempt status
but had not filed form 1023 or form 1024 with the internal revenue service, or
the equivalent successor form designated by the internal revenue service,
before making a contribution or expenditure.

2.  Made
a contribution or expenditure and at that time had its tax exempt status
revoked by the internal revenue service.

3.  Made
a contribution or expenditure and at that time failed to file form 990 with the
internal revenue service, or the equivalent successor form designated by the
internal revenue service, if required by law.

4.  At
the time of making a contribution or expenditure was not registered with the
corporation commission if required by law.

5.  At
the time of making a contribution or expenditure was registered with the
corporation commission but was not in good standing.

D.  A
fund that is established by a corporation, limited liability company, labor
organization or partnership for the purpose of influencing the result of an
election shall register as a political action committee.

E.  An
entity may register as a political party committee only as prescribed in
chapter 5 of this title.

F.  A
committee is not subject to state income tax and is not required to file a state
income tax return.

G.  The
dollar amounts prescribed by this section shall be increased every two years
pursuant to section 16‑931.

Sec. 10.  Section 16-928, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE16-928.  Filing
officer; statements and reports

A.  A
person who that is required to file any statements
and reports required by this article and articles 1, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.5, 1.6
and 1.7 of this chapter shall file with the filing officer in charge of that
election, as follows:

1.  The
secretary of state is the filing officer for statewide and legislative
elections,
including retention elections for supreme court justices and court of appeals
judges.  The
secretary of state is also the filing officer for committees that support or
oppose a recall election or the circulation of a petition for a recall election
for a statewide or legislative officeholder, for committees that support or
oppose a statewide initiative or referendum or other statewide ballot measure,
question or proposition or the circulation of a petition for a statewide
initiative or referendum or other statewide ballot measure, question or
proposition.

2.  The
county officer in charge of elections is the filing officer for county, school
district, community college district and special taxing district elections, including
retention elections for superior court judges. The county officer in charge of
elections is also the filing officer for committees that support or oppose a
recall election or the circulation of a petition for a recall election for an
officeholder of a county office, a school district governing board office, a
community college district governing board office or a special taxing district
governing board office, for committees that support or oppose a county, school
district, community college district or special taxing district initiative or
referendum or other ballot measure, question or proposition, including bond,
tax, budget and budget override measures or that oppose or support the
circulation of a petition for a county, school district, community college
district or special taxing district initiative or referendum or other county,
school district, community college district or special taxing district ballot
measure, question or proposition.

3.  The
city or town clerk is the filing officer for city and town
elections.  The city or town officer in charge of elections clerk is also the filing officer for
committees that support or oppose a recall election or the circulation of a
petition for a recall election for a city or town officeholder, for committees
that support or oppose a city or town initiative or referendum or other city or
town ballot measure, question or proposition or the circulation of a petition
for a city or town initiative or referendum or other city ballot measure,
question or proposition.

B.  Notwithstanding
subsection A of this section, a standing committee shall only file reports only with the secretary of state.

C.  A
filing officer shall provide the option for electronic filing and shall make
all statements and reports publicly available on the internet.  A
filing officer may comply with this section by opting into the secretary of
state's electronic filing system and paying a fee as determined by the
secretary of state. END_STATUTE

Sec. 11.  Section 19-123, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE19-123.  Publicity
pamphlet; printing; distribution; public hearings

A.  When
the secretary of state is ordered by the legislature, or by petition under the
initiative and referendum provisions of the constitution, to submit to the
people a measure or proposed amendment to the constitution, the secretary of
state shall cause to be printed, at the expense of the state, except as
otherwise provided in this article, a publicity pamphlet, which shall contain:

1.  A
true copy of the title and text of the measure or proposed
amendment.  Such text shall indicate material deleted, if any, by
printing such material with a line drawn through the center of the letters of
such material and shall indicate material added or new material by printing the
letters of such material in capital letters.

2.  The
form in which the measure or proposed amendment will appear on the ballot, the
official title, the descriptive title prepared by the secretary of state and
the number by which it will be designated.

3.  The
arguments for and against the measure or amendment.

4.  For
any measure or proposed amendment, a legislative council analysis of the ballot
proposal as prescribed by section 19‑124.

5.  The
report of the commission on judicial performance review for any justices of the
supreme court, judges of the court of appeals and judges of the superior court
who are subject
to retention
standing for election.

6.  The
summary of a fiscal impact statement prepared by the joint legislative budget
committee staff pursuant to subsection D of this section.

B.  The
secretary of state shall post the publicity pamphlet on the secretary of
state's website as soon as is practicable after the pamphlet is printed and
shall mail one copy of the publicity pamphlet to every household that contains
a registered voter.  The mailings may be made over a period of days
but shall be mailed in order to be delivered to households before the earliest
date for receipt by registered voters of any requested early ballots for the
general election.

C.  Sample
ballots for both the primary and general elections shall include a statement
that information on how to obtain a publicity pamphlet for the general election
ballot propositions is available by calling the secretary of
state.  The statement shall include a telephone number and mailing
address of the secretary of state.

D.  On
certification of an initiative measure as qualified for the ballot, the
secretary of state shall hold or cause to be held at least three public
meetings on the ballot measure.  Hearings shall be held in at least
three different counties and shall be held before the date of the election on
the measure.  The hearings shall provide an opportunity for
proponents, opponents and the general public to provide testimony and request
information.  Hearings may be scheduled to include more than one
qualified ballot measure and shall include a fiscal impact presentation on the
measure by the joint legislative budget committee staff.  The joint
legislative budget committee staff shall prepare a summary of the fiscal impact
for each ballot measure, not to exceed three hundred words, for publication in
the publicity pamphlet.END_STATUTE

Sec. 12.  Section 19-201, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE19-201.  Officers
subject to recall; number of petitioners

A.  Every
public officer holding an elective office, either by election,  or appointment or retention, is subject to recall from such
office by the qualified electors of the electoral district from which
candidates are elected to that office.  Such electoral district may
include the whole state. A number of qualified electors equaling twenty‑five
per
cent
percent of the
number of votes cast at the last preceding general election for all the
candidates for the office held by the officer, even if the officer was not
elected at that election, divided by the number of offices that were being
filled at that election, by recall petition, may demand the officer's recall.

B.  In
the case of a public officer holding office in a newly created division or
district of an elective office, either by election or appointment, a number of
qualified electors equaling twenty‑five per cent percent of the number of votes cast at
the last preceding general election for all those who were candidates for other
divisions or districts of the same office held by the officer in that county or
city divided by the number of offices that were being filled at that election,
by recall petition, may demand the officer's recall. 

C.  If
the elective officer to be recalled was appointed to the office or was deemed
elected after an election was canceled due to the absence of opposing
candidates as provided in section 15‑424, 15-1442, 16‑822, 48‑802,
48‑1012, 48‑1208, 48‑1404, 48‑1908, 48‑2010, 48‑2107
or 48‑2208, the recall petition must be signed by the number of qualified
electors that is equal to at least ten per cent percent of the number of active
registered voters in the jurisdiction or district represented by that elective
officer as determined on the date of the last general election. END_STATUTE

Sec. 13.  Section 38-431.08, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE38-431.08.  Exceptions;
limitation

A.  This
article does not apply to:

1.  Any
judicial proceeding of any court or any political caucus of the legislature.

2.  Any
conference committee of the legislature, except that all such meetings shall be
open to the public.

3.  The
commissions
on appellate and trial court appointments and the commission on judicial
qualifications.

4.  Good
cause exception and central registry exception determinations and hearings conducted
by the board of fingerprinting pursuant to sections 41‑619.55 and 41‑619.57.

B.  A
hearing held within a prison facility by the board of executive clemency is
subject to this article, except that the director of the state department of
corrections may:

1.  Prohibit,
on written findings that are made public within five days of so finding, any
person from attending a hearing whose attendance would constitute a serious
threat to the life or physical safety of any person or to the safe, secure and
orderly operation of the prison.

2.  Require
a person who attends a hearing to sign an attendance log. If the person is over
sixteen years of age, the person shall produce photographic identification that
verifies the person's signature.

3.  Prevent
and prohibit any articles from being taken into a hearing except recording
devices and, if the person who attends a hearing is a member of the media,
cameras.

4.  Require
that a person who attends a hearing submit to a reasonable search on entering
the facility.

C.  The
exclusive remedies available to any person who is denied attendance at or
removed from a hearing by the director of the state department of corrections
in violation of this section shall be those remedies available in section 38‑431.07,
as against the director only.

D.  Either
house of the legislature may adopt a rule or procedure pursuant to article IV,
part 2, section 8, Constitution of Arizona, to provide an exemption to the
notice and agenda requirements of this article or to allow standing or conference
committees to meet through technological devices rather than only in person. END_STATUTE

Sec. 14.  Section 41‑1231, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-1231.  Definitions

In this
article, unless the context otherwise requires:

1.  "Authorized
lobbyist" means any person, other than a designated lobbyist or lobbyist
for compensation, who is employed by, retained by or representing a principal,
with or without compensation, for the purpose of lobbying and who is listed as
an authorized lobbyist by the principal in its registration pursuant to section
41‑1232.

2.  "Authorized
public lobbyist" means a person, other than a designated public lobbyist,
who is employed by, retained by or representing a public body, with or without
compensation, for the purpose of lobbying and who is listed as an authorized
public lobbyist by the public body in its registration pursuant to section 41‑1232.01.

3.  "Designated
lobbyist" means the person who is designated by a principal as the single
point of contact for the principal and who is listed as the designated lobbyist
by the principal in its registration pursuant to section 41‑1232.

4.  "Designated
public lobbyist" means the person who is designated by a public body as
the single point of contact for the public body and who is listed as the
designated public lobbyist by the public body in its registration pursuant to
section 41‑1232.01.

5.  "Entertainment"
means the amount of any expenditure paid or incurred for admission to any
sporting or cultural event or for participation in any sporting or cultural
activity. 

6.  "Expenditure"
means a payment, distribution, loan, advance, deposit or gift of money or anything
of value and includes a contract, promise or agreement, whether or not legally
enforceable, to make an expenditure that provides a benefit to an individual
state officer or state employee and that is incurred by or on behalf of one or
more principals, public bodies, lobbyists, designated public lobbyists or
authorized public lobbyists.

7.  "Family
gift" means a gift to a state officer or employee or a member of the
officer's or employee's household from a principal, a lobbyist, a designated public lobbyist or an authorized public lobbyist who is
a relative of the state officer or employee or a member of the household of the
state officer or employee if the donor is not acting as the agent or
intermediary for someone other than a person covered by this paragraph.

8.  "Food
or beverage" means the amount of any expenditure paid or incurred for food
or beverages for a state officer or employee provided at a location at which
the principal, public body, lobbyist, designated public lobbyist or authorized
public lobbyist who made the expenditure is present.

9.  "Gift"
means a payment, distribution, expenditure, advance, deposit or donation of
money, any intangible personal property or any kind of tangible personal or
real property.  For the purposes of this article, gift does not
include:

(a)  A
gift, devise or inheritance from an individual's spouse, child, parent,
grandparent, grandchild, brother, sister, parent‑in‑law, brother‑in‑law,
sister‑in‑law, nephew, niece, aunt, uncle or first cousin or the
spouse of any such individual if the donor is not acting as the agent or
intermediary for someone other than a person covered by this subdivision.

(b)  Expenditures
that are either properly reported or exempt from reporting under this chapter
for:

(i)  A
speaking engagement.

(ii)  Food
or beverages.

(iii)  Travel
and lodging.

(iv)  Flowers.

(c)  Salary,
compensation or employer‑reimbursed expenses lawfully paid to a public
official.

(d)  The
value, cost or price of professional or consulting services that are not rendered
to obtain a benefit for any registered principal, public body, lobbyist,
designated public lobbyist or authorized public lobbyist or the clients of a
principal or lobbyist.

(e)  Expenses
relating to a special event or function to which all members of the
legislature, either house of the legislature or any committee of the
legislature is invited.

(f)  A
plaque or other form of recognition similar to a plaque to a state officer or
state employee to signify the honorary recognition of a service or other
notable accomplishment.

(g)  Informational
material such as books, reports, pamphlets, calendars or periodicals.

(h)  An
item that is not used and that is returned within fifteen days of receipt to
the donor or that is delivered within fifteen days of receipt to a charitable
organization and that is not claimed as a charitable contribution for state or
federal income tax purposes.

(i)  A
campaign contribution that is properly received and reported as required by
law.

(j)  An
item that is given to a state officer or employee if the state officer or
employee gives an item of approximately the same value to the giver of the item
at the same time that the item is given or on a similar occasion as the one
that prompted the original item to be given.

(k)  Gifts
of a personal nature that were customarily received by an individual from the
donor before the individual became a state officer or employee.

(l)  An
item that is given to the general public at an event.

10.  "Legislation"
means bills, resolutions, memorials, amendments, nominations and other matters
that are pending or proposed in either house of the legislature of this state.

11.  "Lobbying":

(a)  Means
attempting to influence the passage or defeat of any legislation by directly
communicating with any legislator or attempting to influence any formal
rulemaking proceeding pursuant to chapter 6 of this title or rulemaking
proceedings that are exempt from chapter 6 of this title by directly
communicating with any state officer or employee. 

(b)  Includes,
for a person who is otherwise required to be registered as a lobbyist for
compensation pursuant to this article, attempting to influence the procurement
of materials, services or construction by an agency as defined in section 41‑1001,
including the office of the governor.   

(c)  Does
not include:

(i)  Interagency
communications between state agency employees.

(ii)  Communications
between a public official or employee of a public body, designated public
lobbyist or authorized public lobbyist and any state officer, except for a
member of the legislature, or an employee of the legislature.

(iii)  Oral
questions or comments made by a person to a state officer or employee regarding
a proposed rule and made in public at a meeting or workshop that is open to the
public and that is sponsored by a state agency, board, commission, council or
office.

(iv)  Communications
between a public body and a self‑employed person or person employed by a
partnership or company regarding the procurement of materials, services or construction
unless the self‑employed person or person employed by a partnership or
company is otherwise required to register pursuant to this article or is
employed by, supervised by at any level or contracted by a person who is
otherwise required to register as a lobbyist for compensation pursuant to this
article.

12.  "Lobbyist"
means any person, other than a designated public lobbyist or authorized public
lobbyist, who is employed by, retained by or representing a person other than
himself, with or without compensation, for the purpose of lobbying and who is
listed as a lobbyist by the principal in its registration pursuant to section
41‑1232.  Lobbyist includes a lobbyist for compensation,
designated lobbyist and authorized lobbyist.

13.  "Lobbyist
for compensation" means a lobbyist who is compensated for the primary
purpose of lobbying on behalf of a principal and who is listed by the principal
in its registration pursuant to section 41‑1232.

14.  "Person"
means an individual, partnership, committee, association or corporation and any
other organization or group of persons, except legislators and political
parties qualified for representation on the ballot pursuant to section 16‑801
or 16‑804.

15.  "Personal
hospitality" means hospitality, meals, beverages, transportation or
lodging furnished but not commercially provided by a person on property or
facilities owned or possessed by the person or the person's family.

16.  "Principal"
means any person, other than a public body, that employs, retains, engages or
uses, with or without compensation, a lobbyist. Principal includes any
subsidiary of a corporation.

17.  "Procurement"
has the same meaning prescribed in section 41‑2503.

18.  "Public
body" means the Arizona board of regents, a university under the jurisdiction
of the Arizona board of regents, the judicial department, any state agency,
board, commission or council, any county, any county elected officer who elects
to appoint a designated public lobbyist or any city, town, district or other
political subdivision of this state that receives and uses tax revenues and
that employs, retains, engages or uses, with or without compensation, a
designated public lobbyist or authorized public lobbyist.

19.  "Public
official" means a person who is duly elected,  or appointed or retained through election to an elected state, county or
local office.

20.  "Single
expenditure" means an expenditure that provides a benefit of more than
twenty dollars to an individual state officer or state employee and that is
incurred by or on behalf of one or more principals, public bodies, lobbyists,
designated public lobbyists or authorized public lobbyists.

21.  "Speaking
engagement":

(a)  Means
the amount of any expense paid or incurred for entrance fees, lodging, food and
beverage, entertainment, travel and other expenses for the state officer's or
employee's attendance at an event, committee, meeting, conference or seminar,
including meetings of state, regional or national organizations or their
committees concerned with legislative or governmental activities if the state
officer or employee participates in the event as a speaker or panel participant
by presenting information relating to the state officer's or employee's
legislative or official duties or by performing a ceremonial function
appropriate to the state officer's or employee's position.

(b)  Does
not include expenditures for an honorarium or any other similar fee paid to a
speaker.

22.  "State
employee" means an employee of the legislature, a university under the
jurisdiction of the Arizona board of regents, the judicial department or a
state office, agency, board, commission or council.

23.  "State
officer" means a person who is duly elected,  or appointed or retained through election to any state office, or a member
of any state board, commission or council, and includes a member of the
legislature. END_STATUTE

Sec. 15.  Section 41-1232.04, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-1232.04.  Registration;
exceptions

Sections 41‑1232,
41‑1232.01, 41‑1232.02 and 41‑1232.03 do not apply to a
person if that person is acting in the following capacity:

1.  A
natural person who merely appears for himself before a committee of the
legislature or before a state officer or employee or a state agency, board,
commission or council to lobby in support of or in opposition to legislation or
official action.

2.  A
natural person who, acting in his own behalf, sends a letter to, converses on
the telephone with or has a personal conversation with a state officer or
employee for the purpose of supporting or opposing any legislation or official
action.

3.  A
duly elected or
retained
public official, judge or justice, a person duly appointed to an elective
public office, or an appointed member of a state, county or local board,
advisory committee, commission or council acting in his official capacity on
matters pertaining to his office, board, advisory committee, commission or
council.

4.  A
person who answers technical questions or provides technical information at the
request of a lobbyist, a
designated
public lobbyist, an
authorized
public lobbyist or a
legislator and
who makes no expenditures required to be reported by this article.

5.  A
person who performs professional services in drafting bills or in advising and
rendering opinions to clients as to the construction and effect of proposed or
pending legislation.

6.  An
attorney who represents clients before any court or before any quasi‑judicial
body.

7.  A
person who contacts a state officer or state employee solely for the purpose of
acquiring information.

8.  A
natural person who is a member of an association, who is not the lobbyist for
compensation, designated lobbyist or authorized lobbyist for the association
and who does not make any expenditures that would otherwise be required to be
reported by this article if the natural person were a lobbyist, a designated
public lobbyist or an authorized public lobbyist. END_STATUTE

Sec. 16.  Conditional enactment

This act
does not become effective unless the Constitution of Arizona is amended by vote
of the people at the next general election to repeal the merit selection of
justices and judges and to provide for the election of justices and judges.

