

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Title 48, chapter 18, article 10, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 48-2816, to read:

START_STATUTE48-2816.  Flood
protection districts divisions; directors; qualification of electors

A.  The
board of supervisors shall order the district to be divided into three or five
divisions, numbered consecutively and as nearly equal in size as practicable.

B.  One
director, who is an elector and landowner, or a qualified elector, in each
division shall be elected for the division as provided in this article.  In
addition, if requested in the petition for organizing the district, three
directors, who are electors and landowners in the district, shall be elected at
large by the qualified electors of the district.

C.  To
be eligible to vote in a district election, a person must qualify under section
48-2609, except as otherwise provided by this section and subject to the
following:

1.  For
the purpose of organizing a new flood protection district, the qualifications
of electors are the same as provided by this chapter for the organization of
drainage districts.

2.  The
administrator or executor of the estate of a deceased person, and the guardian
of a minor or incompetent person who is appointed and qualified under the laws
of this state, may register and cast the vote of the estate or person
represented by the administrator or executor.

3.  The
officer or agent of a corporation in whose name title to property in the
district on which it has paid taxes as shown on the most recent tax roll and
who is designated and authorized by a resolution of the corporate board of
directors is a qualified elector and may register and cast the vote of the
corporation.

4.  The
general partner of a partnership in whose name title to property in the
district on which it has paid taxes as shown on the most recent tax roll and
who is designated and authorized in writing by all of the general partners is a
qualified elector and may register and cast the vote of the partnership.

5.  The
trustee of a trust, or if there is more than one trustee, a trustee who is
designated and authorized in writing by all of the trustees, in whose name
title to property in the district on which it has paid taxes as shown on the
most recent tax roll is a qualified elector and may register and cast the vote
of the trust.

6.  The
member or manager of a limited liability company who is designated and
authorized in writing by the controlling members or managers of the limited
liability company in whose name title to property in the district on which it
has paid taxes as shown on the most recent tax roll is a qualified elector and
may register and cast the vote of the limited liability company. END_STATUTE

