

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Title 12, chapter 23, article 1, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 12-3152, to read:

START_STATUTE12-3152.  Superior
court; vacancies; fingerprinting; applicability

A.  Except
as provided in subsection B of this section, a person who applies to the
governor to fill a vacancy on the superior court, before appointment, shall
submit a full set of fingerprints to the governor for the purpose of obtaining
a state and federal criminal records check pursuant to section 41‑1750
and public law 92‑544.  The department of public safety may
exchange this fingerprint data with the federal bureau of investigation.

B.  This
section does not apply to a superior court applicant who has already submitted
a full set of fingerprints to the supreme court, the commission on appellate
court appointments or the commission on trial court appointments. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 23-422, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE23-422.  Review
board

A.  A
review board is established within the commission to hear and rule on appeals
of administrative law judge decisions generated in this article.  The
board shall consist of five members appointed by the governor.  The
occupational safety and health advisory committee shall submit to the governor
a list of names of persons to be considered for appointment to the board who by
reason of training, education or experience are qualified to carry out the
powers and duties of the board. One member shall be a representative of
management, one member shall be a representative of labor and three members
shall be representatives of the general public.  The board shall
elect a chairman from the board's membership.

B.  Before
appointment by the governor, a prospective member of the board shall submit a
full set of fingerprints to the governor for the purpose of obtaining a state
and federal criminal records check pursuant to section 41-1750 and Public Law
92-544.  The department of public safety may exchange this fingerprint data
with the federal bureau of investigation.

B.  C.  Members of the board
shall be appointed to five‑year terms, except that of the members first
appointed, one each shall serve for a term of one, two, three, four and five
years.  A vacancy occurring on the board other than by expiration of
a term shall be filled in the manner original appointments were made, for the
unexpired portion of the term.  The governor may remove members
of the board may be removed by the governor for
inefficiency, neglect of duty, malfeasance or nonfeasance in
office.  The board shall meet as often as necessary to hold review
hearings as provided in section 23‑423, at times and places as the
chairman may determine. One member from management, one member from labor and
one member from the general public shall be present in order to conduct review
hearings or other business.  All decisions of the board shall be determined
by a majority decision.

C.  D.  The commission shall
employ a staff necessary for the efficient administration of the board's
activities.  All personnel of the board shall be under the
supervision of the director of the commission and shall be paid from the
general fund, subject to legislative appropriation.

D.  E.  Board members shall
receive compensation pursuant to section 38‑611, which shall be paid from
the general fund, subject to legislative appropriation.

E.  F.  The monies
appropriated to carry out the purposes of subsections C and
D and E of this section shall be appropriated to the
commission, shall not exceed twenty thousand dollars per year and are exempt
from the provisions of section 35‑190 relating to lapsing of appropriations.  The
monies shall be kept separate and apart from other monies of the commission and
shall be available only to the board.

F.  G.  A member of the board
shall not participate on a matter with which the member is personally
associated.  If a member is disqualified pursuant to this subsection
or is unable to participate for any other reason on a particular matter, the
governor shall appoint a person as a temporary member to participate in the
hearing.  The occupational safety and health advisory committee shall submit to
the governor a list of names of persons to be considered for a temporary
appointment.  The person shall meet the qualifications of subsection
A of this section, and shall be representative of the same area as that of the
member for whom the person is serving as alternate. END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Section 26-1026, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE26-1026.  Military
judge of a general or special court‑martial

A.  A
military judge shall be detailed to each general court‑martial.  Subject
to rules of the adjutant general, a military judge may be detailed to any
special court‑martial.  The adjutant general shall adopt rules
providing for the manner in which military judges are detailed for the courts‑martial
and for the persons who are authorized to detail military judges for the courts‑martial.  The
military judge shall preside over each open session of the court‑martial
to which the military judge has been detailed.

B.  A
military judge must be a member in good standing of the state bar of Arizona
and a current or former member of the United States armed forces or the armed
forces of this state who is appointed as a military judge by the governor after
certification by the state judge advocate as having met the qualifications.

C.  Before
appointment by the governor, a prospective military judge shall submit a full
set of fingerprints to the governor for the purpose of obtaining a state and
federal criminal records check pursuant to section 41‑1750 and Public Law
92-544.  The department of public safety may exchange this
fingerprint data with the federal bureau of investigation.

C.  D.  The military judge of
a general court‑martial shall be designated by the state judge advocate,
or the state judge advocate's designee, for detail in accordance with rules
adopted under subsection A of this section.  Unless the court‑martial
was convened by the governor, neither the convening authority nor any member of
the convening authority's staff shall prepare or review any report concerning
the effectiveness, fitness or efficiency of the military judge detailed, which
relates to the military judge's performance of duty as a military judge.  A
commissioned officer who is certified to be qualified for duty as a military
judge of a general court‑martial may perform duties of a judicial or
nonjudicial nature other than those relating to the officer's primary duty as a
military judge of a general court‑martial if the duties are assigned to
the officer by or with the approval of the state judge advocate or the state
judge advocate's designee.

D.  E.  A person is not
eligible to act as military judge in a case if the person is the accuser or a
witness or has acted as an investigating officer or a counsel in the same case.

E.  F.  The military judge of
a court‑martial may not consult with the members of the court except in
the presence of the accused, trial counsel and defense counsel, and the military
judge may not vote with the members of the court. END_STATUTE

Sec. 4.  Section 26-1067, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE26-1067.  Court
of military appeals; members; terms; compensation; duties; review; procedures

A.  The
Arizona court of military appeals is established and is located for
administrative purposes only in the department of emergency and military
affairs.  The court shall consist of five judges appointed by the
governor on the recommendation of the adjutant general with the advice of the
state judge advocate for a term of six years.  Initial appointments
shall be staggered. The term of office for all successor judges is six years,
but any judge appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of
the term for which the judge's predecessor was appointed shall be appointed
only for the unexpired term of the predecessor.  Not more than three
judges of the court may be appointed from the same political
party.  Judges may succeed themselves in office.  A person
is eligible for appointment to this court who, in addition to the requirements
of article VI, section 22, Constitution of Arizona, has at least five years'
experience as a judge advocate in the national guard or armed forces of the
United States.

B.  Before
appointment by the governor, a prospective judge shall submit a full set of
fingerprints to the governor for the purpose of obtaining a state and federal
criminal records check pursuant to section 41‑1750 and Public Law
92-544.  The department of public safety may exchange this
fingerprint data with the federal bureau of investigation.

B.  C.  The governor shall
designate one of the judges to act as chief judge.  The chief judge
has precedence and shall preside at any session the judge
attends.  The other judges have precedence and shall preside
according to the seniority of their appointments.  Judges whose
commissions bear the same date have precedence according to seniority in age.

C.  D.  The court shall sit in
panels of no less than three judges to be selected by the presiding judge.

D.  E.  Judges of the Arizona
court of military appeals may be removed by the governor, on notice and
hearing, for neglect of duty or malfeasance in office or for mental or physical
disability but for no other cause.

E.  F.  The judges of the
Arizona court of military appeals, while actually sitting in review of a matter
placed under their jurisdiction by this chapter, and while traveling to and
from such session, are eligible to receive compensation equal to that
compensation prescribed for the judges of the Arizona court of appeals, as
provided by law, together with the actual cost of meals, lodging and travel
expense or the amount set by law if private transportation is
utilized.  Payment shall be made from monies appropriated to the
national guard.

F.  G.  The Arizona court of
military appeals has exclusive appellate and special action jurisdiction, in
appeals filed by this state pursuant to section 26‑1062, or on petition
of an accused, to hear and review the record in all general and special court‑martial
cases and all summary court‑martial cases in which a sentence of
confinement has been adjudged.

G.  H.  The accused has thirty
calendar days from the time of receipt of actual notice of the final action on
the case by the convening authority under section 26‑1060 to petition the
Arizona court of military appeals for review.  The court shall act on
a petition within sixty calendar days after receipt.  If the court
fails or refuses to grant a petition for review, the final action of the
convening authority is deemed approved.  Notwithstanding any other
provision of this chapter, if the court grants a hearing of an appeal, the
court may grant a stay or defer service of the sentence of confinement or any
other punishment until the court's final decision on the case.

H.  I.  The Arizona court of
military appeals may act only with respect to the findings and sentence as
finally approved and ordered executed by the convening authority.

I.  J.  If the Arizona court
of military appeals sets aside the findings and sentence, it may order a
rehearing, except if the setting aside is based on lack of sufficient evidence
in the record to support the findings.  If it sets aside the findings
and sentence and does not order a rehearing, it shall order that the charges be
dismissed.  After the Arizona court of military appeals has acted on
the case, the record shall be returned to the state judge advocate who shall
notify the convening authority of the court's decision.  If further
action is required, the state judge advocate shall instruct the convening
authority to take action in accordance with that decision.  If the
court has ordered a rehearing, but the convening authority finds a rehearing
impracticable, the state judge advocate may dismiss the charges.

J.  K.  Decisions of the
Arizona court of military appeals are subject to review by the Arizona supreme
court by a petition for review in accordance with the Arizona rules of criminal
procedure and the rules of the supreme court of Arizona.

K.  L.  With monies
appropriated to the national guard, the adjutant general may employ persons
necessary to assist the Arizona court of military appeals in its duties.

L.  M.  The adjutant general
with the approval of the governor shall adopt rules necessary for the
administration of the court.  The accused has a right to appointed
military counsel for an appeal. END_STATUTE

Sec. 5.  Section 32-802, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-802.  Board
of podiatry examiners; compensation

A.  There shall be a The state board of
podiatry examiners which shall consist is
established consisting of five members appointed by the
governor.  Each member shall be appointed for a term of five years,
to begin and end on February 1.

B.  Before
appointment by the governor, a prospective member of the board shall submit a
full set of fingerprints to the governor for the purpose of obtaining a state
and federal criminal records check pursuant to section 41-1750 and Public Law
92-544.  The department of public safety may exchange this fingerprint data
with the federal bureau of investigation.

B.  C.  Three members of the
board shall have practiced podiatry continuously in this state for not less
than two years immediately preceding appointment and shall have valid licenses
to practice podiatry.  Two members of the board shall be lay
persons.  All members of the board shall be citizens of the United
States.

C.  D.  A vacancy on the board
occurring other than by the expiration of a term shall be filled by appointment
by the governor for the unexpired term.

D.  E.  All appointments shall
be made promptly, and in the case of the vacancy of a professional member or
members, appointment shall be made no later than ninety days from the
expiration of the term or vacancy.

E.  F.  The term of any member
may, at the discretion of the board, may end
and the office be declared vacant for failure to attend three consecutive
meetings of the board.

F.  G.  Members of the board
shall receive compensation of fifty dollars for each day of actual service in
the business of the board.

G.  H.  The state board of
podiatry examiners may hire practicing podiatrists or other medical
specialists, or both, as needed, in order to assist the board in giving
examinations.  Such examiners shall receive the same compensation as
board members.

H.  I.  Subject to title 41,
chapter 4, article 4, the board may employ personnel, including trained
investigators, as it deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.

I.  J.  Members, personnel and
examiners of the board are personally immune from suit with respect to all acts
done and actions taken in good faith and in furtherance of the purposes of this
chapter. END_STATUTE

Sec. 6.  Section 32-901, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-901.  Board
of chiropractic examiners; removal; immunity

A.  The
state board of chiropractic examiners is established consisting of three
licensed chiropractors and two consumer members who are appointed by the
governor.  One member shall be appointed each year for a term of five
years, to begin and end on July 1.

B.  Before
appointment by the governor, a prospective member of the board shall submit a
full set of fingerprints to the governor for the purpose of obtaining a state
and federal criminal records check pursuant to section 41-1750 and Public Law
92-544.  The department of public safety may exchange this fingerprint data
with the federal bureau of investigation.

B.  C.  Each member of the board
shall be a resident of this state, and each of the licensed chiropractic
members shall have practiced chiropractic in this state for three years or
more.  The two consumer members of the board shall not be in any
manner connected with, or have an interest in, any college or school of
chiropractic or any person practicing any form of healing or treatment of
bodily or mental ailments.  A board member shall not receive compensation as an
agent or employee of or a contractor for an insurance company.  This subsection
does not prevent a board member who is a licensed chiropractor from receiving
compensation from an insurance company for patient care as provided for in a
patient's insurance policy.

C.  D.  Before taking office,
each board member shall take an oath prescribed by law and shall affirm by oath
that the board member meets the qualifications as prescribed in this section.

D.  E.  The
governor may remove board members may be removed by the
governor for neglect of duty, malfeasance or misfeasance in office.
Vacancies occurring on the board other than by expiration of a term shall be
filled for the unexpired portion of the term by appointment in the same manner
as regular appointments.

E.  F.  No
A member of the board may not serve
more than two consecutive terms.

F.  G.  A board member who
acts within the board member's authority is personally immune from civil
liability with respect to all actions taken in good faith pursuant to this
chapter. END_STATUTE

Sec. 7.  Section 32-1203, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-1203.  State
board of dental examiners; qualifications of members; terms

A.  The
state board of dental examiners is established consisting of six licensed
dentists, two licensed dental hygienists, two public members and one business
entity member appointed by the governor for a term of four years, to begin and
end on January 1.

B.  Before
appointment by the governor, a prospective member of the board shall submit a
full set of fingerprints to the governor for the purpose of obtaining a state
and federal criminal records check pursuant to section 41-1750 and Public Law
92-544.  The department of public safety may exchange this fingerprint data
with the federal bureau of investigation.

B.  C.  The business entity
member and the public members may participate in all board proceedings and
determinations, except in the preparing, giving or grading of examinations for
licensure.  Dental hygienist board members may participate in all
board proceedings and determinations, except in the preparing, giving and
grading of examinations that do not relate to dental hygiene procedures.

C.  D.  A board member shall
not serve more than two consecutive terms.

D.  E.  For the purposes of
this section, business entity member does not include a person who is licensed
pursuant to this chapter. END_STATUTE

Sec. 8.  Section 32-1502, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-1502.  Naturopathic
physicians medical board; appointment; qualifications; term of office; immunity

A.  The
naturopathic physicians medical board is established consisting of the
following members:

1.  Four
physician members appointed by the governor.  Each physician member shall be:

(a)  A
resident of this state for at least five years immediately preceding the
appointment.

(b)  A
doctor of naturopathic medicine with a degree from a naturopathic school or
college approved by the board who has engaged in full‑time practice of
naturopathic medicine for at least five years immediately preceding the
appointment.

2.  Three
public members appointed by the governor.  Each public member shall:

(a)  Be
a resident of this state for at least five years immediately preceding the
appointment.

(b)  Not
be connected, in any manner, with or have any interest in a school of medicine,
a health care institution or any person practicing any form
of healing or treatment of bodily or mental ailments.

(c)  Demonstrate
an interest in the health problems in this state.

B.  Before
appointment by the governor, a prospective member of the board shall submit a
full set of fingerprints to the governor for the purpose of obtaining a state
and federal criminal records check pursuant to section 41-1750 and Public Law
92-544.  The department of public safety may exchange this fingerprint data
with the federal bureau of investigation.

B.  C.  The terms of office of
the physician members and the public members are five years to begin and end on
June 30.  Each physician member and each public member continue to
hold office until the appointment and qualification of their successors,
subject to the following exceptions:

1.  A
member of the board may be removed from office if the governor finds the member
was guilty of malfeasance, misfeasance or dishonorable conduct.

2.  The
term of any member automatically ends on resignation, permanent removal from
this state or removal from this state for a period of more than six months.

C.  D.  There shall be no
monetary liability on the part of and no cause of action shall arise against
the members of the board, the secretary‑treasurer or permanent or
temporary personnel of the board for any act done or proceeding undertaken or
performed in good faith and in furtherance of the purposes of this chapter. END_STATUTE

Sec. 9.  Section 32-1602, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-1602.  Board
of nursing; member terms; immunity

A.  The
Arizona state board of nursing is established consisting
of eleven members who are appointed by the governor.  Six members
shall be registered nurses, including at least one registered nurse
practitioner, clinical nurse specialist or certified registered nurse
anesthetist.  One member shall be a nursing assistant or a nursing assistant
educator.  Two members shall represent the public and two members
shall be licensed practical nurses.  Members shall be appointed for a term of
five years, to begin and end on June 30.

B.  Before
appointment by the governor, a prospective member of the board shall submit a
full set of fingerprints to the governor for the purpose of obtaining a state
and federal criminal records check pursuant to section 41-1750 and Public Law
92-544.  The department of public safety may exchange this fingerprint data
with the federal bureau of investigation.

B.  C.  On or before May 1
each year and at any other time a vacancy on the board occurs, the governor
shall make an appointment or appointments to the board.  Appointment
to fill a vacancy other than by expiration shall be for the unexpired
term.  A person shall not serve more than two consecutive terms as a
member of the board.

C.  D.  The governor may
remove any person from the board for neglect of any duty imposed by law or for
incompetency or unprofessional or dishonorable conduct.

D.  E.  A board member's term
automatically ends:

1.  On
the death of the member.

2.  On
the member's written resignation submitted to the board president or to the
governor.

3.  On
the member's failure to attend three consecutive board meetings.

E.  F.  A board member who
acts within the scope of board duties, without malice and in the reasonable
belief that the member's action is warranted by law is not subject to civil
liability. END_STATUTE

Sec. 10.  Section 32-1672, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-1672.  Board
of dispensing opticians; members; qualifications; terms; removal; immunity

A.  The
state board of dispensing opticians is established consisting of seven members
appointed by the governor.  Five members of the board shall be licensees in
good standing under this chapter.  Two members of the board shall be public
members.

B.  Before
appointment by the governor, a prospective member of the board shall submit a
full set of fingerprints to the governor for the purpose of obtaining a state
and federal criminal records check pursuant to section 41-1750 and Public Law
92-544.  The department of public safety may exchange this fingerprint data
with the federal bureau of investigation.

B.  C.  Each member shall
serve for a term of five years expiring on the first day in January of the
appropriate year.  A member shall not serve for more than two complete
consecutive terms.

C.  D.  The board shall elect
from among its membership a chairman and such other officers as it deems
necessary, who shall hold their offices at the pleasure of the board.

D.  E.  Members of the board
are eligible to receive compensation in the amount of fifty dollars for each
day of actual service in the business of the board.

E.  F.  The governor may
remove a board member from office if the governor determines that the member is
guilty of malfeasance, misfeasance or dishonorable conduct.

F.  G.  The board, the
secretary‑treasurer of the board and permanent and temporary board
personnel are immune from civil liability for any act the board, its officers
and board personnel perform in good faith and in furtherance of this chapter. END_STATUTE

Sec. 11.  Section 32-1702, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-1702.  Board
of optometry; appointment; qualifications; term; removal

A.  The
state board of optometry is established consisting of the following members who
are appointed by the governor to staggered four-year terms that end on July 1:

1.  Five
members who have been licensed and engaged in the active practice of optometry
in this state for at least three years immediately before the appointment.

2.  Two
public members who do not have a direct or indirect interest in the practice of
optometry, opticianry or medicine.

B.  Before
appointment by the governor, a prospective member of the board shall submit a
full set of fingerprints to the governor for the purpose of obtaining a state
and federal criminal records check pursuant to section 41-1750 and Public Law
92-544.  The department of public safety may exchange this fingerprint data
with the federal bureau of investigation.

B.  C.  The governor may
remove any professional member for incompetency or unprofessional conduct or if
the member's license has been revoked or suspended or if the member has been
censured or placed on probation.  The governor may remove any member for
neglect of duty or improper conduct.  The unexcused absence of a
member for more than two consecutive meetings is justification for
removal.  Appointment by the governor to fill a vacancy caused other
than by expiration of a term is for the unexpired portion of the term.

C.  D.  A member of the board
is ineligible to serve more than two consecutive full terms.  The
completion of the unexpired portion of a full term does not constitute a full
term for purposes of this subsection. 

D.  E.  The board shall
conduct regular meetings at least six times each year at times and places
designated by the board or the governor.  Special meetings may be called that
the president determines are necessary to carry out the functions of the board,
including meetings using communications equipment that allows all members
participating in the meetings to hear each other.

E.  F.  A majority of the
members of the board constitutes a quorum and a majority vote of a quorum
present at any meeting governs all actions taken by the board. END_STATUTE

Sec. 12.  Section 32-1801, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-1801.  Arizona
board of osteopathic examiners in medicine and surgery

A.  There shall be an The Arizona board of
osteopathic examiners in medicine and surgery which shall consist
is established consisting of seven members appointed by
the governor.  One member of the board shall be appointed each year
for a term of five years, to begin and end on April 15.

B.  Before
appointment by the governor, a prospective member of the board shall submit a
full set of fingerprints to the governor for the purpose of obtaining a state
and federal criminal records check pursuant to section 41-1750 and Public Law
92-544.  The department of public safety may exchange this fingerprint data
with the federal bureau of investigation.

B.  C.  Two members of the
board shall be public members who shall not be in any manner connected with, or
have an interest in, any school of medicine or any person practicing any form
of healing or treatment of bodily or mental ailments and who has demonstrated
an interest in the health problems of the state.  The other five
members of the board shall have engaged in the practice of medicine as an
osteopathic physician in this state for at least five years preceding their
appointments, hold active licenses in good standing and, at the time of
appointment, be practicing medicine with direct patient contact.  In
making appointments of each professional member of the board, the governor
shall consider a list of qualified persons submitted by the Arizona osteopathic
medical association and recommendations by any other person.  Members of the
board shall continue in office until their successors are appointed and
qualified.  Each board member, prior to before entering upon on his
duties, shall take an oath prescribed by law and in addition thereto shall make
an oath as to his qualifications as prescribed in this section.  No
board member may serve more than two consecutive five year terms.

C.  D.  The
governor may remove board members may be removed by the
governor if they fail to attend three or more board meetings within
twelve months.  This does not include telephonic meetings of the
board.  The governor may also remove board members for malfeasance,
misfeasance or incompetence in their office, unprofessional or dishonorable
conduct in their office or unprofessional or dishonorable
conduct.  The governor shall appoint a qualified replacement to fill
a vacant position for the unexpired portion of the term. END_STATUTE

Sec. 13.  Section 32-2502, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-2502.  Arizona
regulatory board of physician assistants; membership; appointment; terms;
immunity

A.  The
Arizona regulatory board of physician assistants is established consisting of
the following members:

1.  Five
physician assistants who hold a current regular license pursuant to this
chapter.  The governor may appoint these members from a list of
qualified candidates submitted by the Arizona state association of physician
assistants.  The governor may seek additional input and nominations
before the governor makes the physician assistant appointments. 

2.  Two
public members who are appointed by the governor.

3.  Two
physicians who are actively engaged in the practice of medicine and who are
licensed pursuant to chapter 17 of this title, one of whom supervises a
physician assistant at the time of appointment, and who are appointed by the
governor.

4.  Two
physicians who are actively engaged in the practice of medicine and who are
licensed pursuant to chapter 13 of this title, one of whom supervises a
physician assistant at the time of appointment, and who are appointed by the
governor.

B.  Before
appointment by the governor, a prospective member of the board shall submit a
full set of fingerprints to the governor for the purpose of obtaining a state
and federal criminal records check pursuant to section 41-1750 and Public Law
92-544.  The department of public safety may exchange this fingerprint data
with the federal bureau of investigation.

B.  C.  The term of office of
members of the board is four years to begin and end on July 1.

C.  D.  Each board member is
eligible for appointment to not more than two full terms, except that the term
of office for a member appointed to fill a vacancy that is not caused by the
expiration of a full term is for the unexpired portion of that term and the
governor may reappoint that member to not more than two additional full
terms.  Each board member may continue to hold office until the
appointment and qualification of that member's successor.  However,
the governor may remove a member after notice and a hearing, on a finding of
continued neglect of duty, incompetence or unprofessional or dishonorable
conduct.  That member's term ends when the finding is made. 

D.  E.  A board member's term
automatically ends:

1.  On
written resignation submitted to the board chairperson or to the governor.

2.  If
the member is absent from this state for more than six months during a one‑year
period.

3.  If
the member fails to attend three consecutive regular board meetings.

4.  Five
years after retirement from active practice.

E.  F.  Board members are
immune from civil liability for all good faith actions they take pursuant to
this chapter. END_STATUTE

Sec. 14.  Section 32-2902, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-2902.  Board
of homeopathic and integrated medicine examiners; membership; terms; removal;
immunity

A.  The
board of homeopathic and integrated medicine examiners is established
consisting of the following members appointed by the governor:

1.  Two
public members.

2.  Until
January 1, 2017, four members who are licensed pursuant to section 32‑2912,
subsection A.

3.  Beginning
January 1, 2017, five members who are licensed pursuant to this chapter, one of
whom is licensed pursuant to section 32‑2912, subsection B.

B.  Before
appointment by the governor, a prospective member of the board shall submit a
full set of fingerprints to the governor for the purpose of obtaining a state
and federal criminal records check pursuant to section 41-1750 and Public Law
92-544.  The department of public safety may exchange this fingerprint data
with the federal bureau of investigation.

B.  C.  Board members serve
staggered three year three-year terms
ending on June 30. Board members shall not serve more than three consecutive
terms.  A board member may continue to serve until that member's
replacement takes office.

C.  D.  Board members shall be
residents of this state for at least three consecutive years immediately before
their appointment.

D.  E.  The governor may
remove a board member from office because of that member's neglect of duty,
malfeasance, misfeasance, incompetence or unprofessional or dishonorable
conduct.

E.  F.  A board member's term
of office automatically ends if that member is absent from this state for more
than six months or if that member fails to attend three consecutive regularly
scheduled board meetings.

F.  G.  Board members and
board employees are immune from civil liability for any good faith action they
take to implement this chapter. END_STATUTE

Sec. 15.  Section 32-3252, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-3252.  Board
of behavioral health examiners; appointment; qualifications; terms;
compensation; immunity; training program

A.  The
board of behavioral health examiners is established consisting of the following
members appointed by the governor: 

1.  The
following professional members:

(a)  Two
members who are licensed in social work pursuant to this chapter, at least one
of whom is a licensed clinical social worker.

(b)  Two
members who are licensed in counseling pursuant to this chapter, at least one
of whom is a licensed professional counselor.

(c)  Two
members who are licensed in marriage and family therapy pursuant to this
chapter, at least one of whom is a licensed marriage and family therapist.

(d)  Two
members who are licensed in substance abuse counseling pursuant to this
chapter, at least one of whom is a licensed independent substance abuse
counselor.

2.  Four
public members. 

B.  Before
appointment by the governor, a prospective member of the board shall submit a
full set of fingerprints to the governor for the purpose of obtaining a state
and federal criminal records check pursuant to section 41-1750 and Public Law
92-544.  The department of public safety may exchange this fingerprint data
with the federal bureau of investigation.

B.  C.  Each professional
board member shall:

1.  Be
a resident of this state for not less than one year before appointment.

2.  Be
an active licensee in good standing.

3.  Have
at least five years of experience in an area of behavioral health licensed
pursuant to this chapter.

C.  D.  Each public member
shall:

1.  Be
a resident of this state for not less than one year before appointment.

2.  Be
at least twenty‑one years of age.

3.  Not
be licensed or eligible for licensure pursuant to this chapter unless the
public member has been retired from active practice for at least five years.

4.  Not
currently have a substantial financial interest in an entity that directly
provides behavioral health services.

5.  Not
have a household member who is licensed or eligible for licensure pursuant to
this chapter unless the household member has been retired from active practice
for at least five years.

D.  E.  The term of office of
board members is three years to begin and end on the third Monday in
January.  A member shall not serve more than two full consecutive
terms.

E.  F.  The board shall
annually elect a chairman and secretary‑treasurer from its membership.

F.  G.  Board members are
eligible to receive compensation of not more than eighty‑five dollars for
each day actually and necessarily spent in the performance of their duties.

G.  H.  Board members and
personnel are personally immune from suit with respect to all acts done and
actions taken in good faith and in furtherance of the purposes of this chapter.

H.  I.  Each board member must
complete a twelve-hour training program that emphasizes responsibilities for
administrative management, licensure, judicial processes and temperament within
one year after appointment to the board. END_STATUTE

Sec. 16.  Section 32-3402, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-3402.  Board
of occupational therapy examiners; members; qualifications; terms;
compensation; civil immunity

A.  The
board of occupational therapy examiners is established and consists of five
members appointed by the governor.  Each board member shall be a
resident of the state at the time of appointment.  The governor shall
appoint two persons who are not engaged, directly or indirectly, in the
provision of health care services to serve as public members.  The
other three members shall have at least three years of experience in
occupational therapy or teaching in an accredited occupational therapy
education program in this state immediately before appointment and shall be
licensed under this chapter.  The governor may select board members
from a list of licensees submitted by the Arizona occupational therapy
association, inc. or any other appropriate organization.

B.  Before
appointment by the governor, a prospective member of the board shall submit a
full set of fingerprints to the governor for the purpose of obtaining a state
and federal criminal records check pursuant to section 41-1750 and Public Law
92-544.  The department of public safety may exchange this fingerprint data
with the federal bureau of investigation.

B.  C.  The term of office of
board members is three years to begin and end on the third Monday in
January.  A member shall not serve more than two consecutive terms.

C.  D.  The board, at its
first regular meeting after the start of each calendar year and as necessary,
shall elect a chairperson and other officers from among its members.  The
board shall meet at least once each quarter in compliance with the open meeting
requirements of title 38, chapter 3, article 3.1 and shall keep an official
record of these meetings.  Other meetings may be convened at the call
of the chairperson or the written request of any two board
members.  A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a
quorum.  

D.  E.  Each member of the
board is eligible to receive compensation in the amount of one hundred dollars
for each regular or special board meeting the member attends and is eligible
for reimbursement for all expenses necessarily and properly incurred in
attending board meetings.

E.  F.  A board member is
immune from civil liability for any actions that are within the scope of the
board member's duties if they are taken without malice and in the reasonable
belief that they are warranted by law.  END_STATUTE

Sec. 17.  Section 32-3502, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-3502.  Board
of respiratory care examiners; membership, appointment, qualifications

A.  The
board of respiratory care examiners is established consisting of seven members
appointed by the governor.  Each board member shall be a resident of
this state at the time of appointment.  The governor shall appoint:

1.  Three
licensed respiratory care practitioners, at least one of whom is a technical
director of a respiratory care department or respiratory care corporation or an
officer or faculty member of a college, school or institution engaged in
respiratory therapy education and at least one of whom is involved in direct
patient care.

2.  A
physician who is licensed pursuant to chapter 13 or 17 of this title and who is
knowledgeable in respiratory care.

3.  Two
public members who are not engaged, directly or indirectly, in the provision of
health care services.

4.  One
hospital administrator.

B.  Before
appointment by the governor, a prospective member of the board shall submit a
full set of fingerprints to the governor for the purpose of obtaining a state
and federal criminal records check pursuant to section 41-1750 and Public Law
92-544.  The department of public safety may exchange this fingerprint data
with the federal bureau of investigation.

B.  C.  The respiratory care
practitioner members shall:

1.  Have
at least five years of experience in respiratory care or respiratory therapy
education.

2.  Have
been employed actively in direct patient care, respiratory therapy education or
management or supervision of respiratory care for at least three years
immediately preceding appointment.

3.  Be
licensed pursuant to this chapter.

C.  D.  The governor may
appoint the licensed respiratory care practitioners from a list of seven
qualified persons submitted to the governor by the Arizona society for
respiratory care.

D.  E.  The governor may
appoint the physician member from a list of three qualified persons submitted
to the governor by the Arizona medical association and the Arizona osteopathic
medical association.

E.  F.  The governor may
appoint the hospital administrator member from a list of three qualified
persons submitted to the governor by the Arizona hospital association.

F.  G.  The term of office of
each member is three years, to begin and end on June 30.  A member
shall not serve for more than two consecutive terms.

G.  H.  The governor may
remove board members for neglect of duty, malfeasance or misfeasance. END_STATUTE

Sec. 18.  Section 32-3902, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-3902.  Acupuncture
board of examiners; members; qualifications; terms; removal; compensation

A.  The
acupuncture board of examiners is established consisting of the following
members appointed by the governor:

1.  Four
members who are licensed to practice acupuncture pursuant to this chapter and
who have practiced acupuncture in this state for at least three
years.  Not more than two of these members shall be graduates of the
same school or college of acupuncture.  The governor may make these
appointments from a list of names submitted by a statewide acupuncture
society.  The initial appointees need not be licensed pursuant to
this chapter at the time of selection but shall meet all of the qualifications
for licensure as prescribed by this chapter. 

2.  Three
consumers who:

(a)  Are
not employed in a health profession.

(b)  Do
not have any pecuniary interest in a school of medicine or health care
institution.

(c)  Demonstrate
an interest in health issues in this state.

3.  Two
members who are licensed pursuant to chapter 8, 13, 14, 17 or 29 of this
title.  These members shall not be licensed pursuant to the same
chapter.

B.  Before appointment
by the governor, a prospective member of the board shall submit a full set of
fingerprints to the governor for the purpose of obtaining a state and federal
criminal records check pursuant to section 41-1750 and Public Law 92-544.  The
department of public safety may exchange this fingerprint data with the federal
bureau of investigation.

B.  C.  Board members shall be
residents of this state for at least three years immediately preceding their
appointment.

C.  D.  Board members serve three-year
terms to begin and end on the third Monday in January.  A member
shall not serve more than two consecutive terms.

D.  E.  The board shall meet
in January of each year to elect a chairperson and secretary. 

E.  F.  The board shall meet
quarterly and at the call of the chairperson or a majority of board members.

F.  G.  Board members are
eligible to receive compensation in an amount not to exceed fifty dollars per
day for each day of actual service in the business of the board and are
eligible for reimbursement of expenses necessarily and properly incurred in
attending board meetings.

G.  H.  The governor may
remove a board member from office for malfeasance, dishonorable conduct or
unprofessional management of board duties.

H.  I.  The term of any member
automatically ends on resignation or absence from this state for a period of at
least six months.  The governor shall fill vacancies for an unexpired
portion of a term in the same manner as regular appointments.

I.  J.  Board members and
board employees are not subject to civil liability for any act done or
proceeding undertaken or performed in good faith and in furtherance of the
purposes of this chapter. END_STATUTE

Sec. 19.  Section 38-211, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE38-211.  Nominations
by governor; consent of senate; appointment

A.  When
it is provided by law that a state officer shall be appointed pursuant to this
section, the governor shall nominate and with the consent of the senate appoint
such officer as prescribed in this section.

B.  If
the term of any state office which that is
appointive pursuant to this section expires, begins or becomes vacant during a
regular legislative session, the governor shall during such session nominate a
person who meets the requirements of law for such office and shall promptly
transmit the nomination to the president of the senate.  If the
incumbent is capable of continuing to serve until his successor has qualified,
a nominee to that position shall not assume and discharge the duties of the
office, pending senate confirmation. If the incumbent is unable to continue to
discharge the duties of office, the nominee shall assume and discharge the
duties of the office pending senate confirmation. If the senate consents to the
nomination, the governor shall then appoint the nominee to serve for the term
or, in the case of a vacancy, for the unexpired term in which the vacancy
occurred.  If the senate rejects the nomination the nominee shall not
be appointed and the governor shall promptly nominate another person who meets
the requirements for such office.  If the senate takes no formal
action on the nomination during such legislative session, or if a nomination
other than one that is required to be sent to the senate during the first week
of the legislative session is not received during the session, the governor
shall after the close of such legislative session appoint the nominee to serve,
and the nominee shall discharge the duties of office, subject to confirmation
during the next legislative session.  

C.  If
the term of any state office which that is
appointive pursuant to this section expires, begins or becomes vacant during a
time in which the legislature is not in regular session, the governor shall
nominate a person who meets the requirements of law for such office and shall
transmit the nomination to the president of the senate during the first week of
the next regular session.  The nominee shall assume and discharge the
duties of the office until rejection of the nomination or inaction of the
senate.

D.  Every
officer who is subject to confirmation as provided in this section and whose
term is not fixed by law shall hold office at the pleasure of the appointing
power.

E.  In
no event shall a nominee serve longer than one year after nomination without
senate consent.

F.  Nominations
made by the governor shall be in writing, designating the residence of the
nominee and the office for which nominated.

G.  When
the senate consents to a nomination, its secretary shall deliver a copy of the
resolution of consent, certified by the president of the senate, to the
secretary of state, who shall notify the governor.  When the senate rejects a
nomination, its secretary shall inform the governor promptly.

H.  Before
nomination or appointment by the governor pursuant to this section, the
prospective nominee shall submit a full set of fingerprints to the governor for
the purpose of obtaining a state and federal criminal records check pursuant to
section 41-1750 and Public Law 92-544.  The department of public safety may
exchange this fingerprint data with the federal bureau of investigation. END_STATUTE

Sec. 20.  Section 38-848, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE38-848.  Board
of trustees; powers and duties; independent trust fund; administrator; agents
and employees; advisory committee

A.  Beginning
January 1, 2017, the board of trustees shall consist of nine members and shall
have the rights, powers and duties that are set forth in this section.  The
term of office of members shall be five years to expire on the third Monday in
January of the appropriate year.  The board shall select a chairperson from
among its members each calendar year.  Members are eligible to receive
compensation in an amount of fifty dollars a day, but not to exceed one
thousand dollars in any one fiscal year, and are eligible for reimbursement of
expenses pursuant to chapter 4, article 2 of this title.  Beginning
January 1, 2017, the board consists of the following members appointed as
follows:

1.  Two
members representing law enforcement, one of whom is appointed by the president
of the senate and one of whom is appointed by the governor.  A
statewide association representing law enforcement in this state shall forward
nominations to the appointing elected officials, providing at least three
nominees for each position.  At least one of the members appointed under this
paragraph shall be an elected local board member.

2.  Two
members representing firefighters, one of whom is appointed by the speaker of
the house of representatives and one of whom is appointed by the governor.  A
statewide association representing firefighters in this state shall forward
nominations to the appointing elected officials, providing at least three
nominees for each position.  At least one of the members appointed under this
paragraph shall be an elected local board member.  

3.  Three
members representing cities and towns in this state, one of whom is appointed
by the president of the senate, one of whom is appointed by the speaker of the
house of representatives and one of whom is appointed by the
governor.  An association representing cities and towns in this state
shall forward nominations to the appointing elected officials, providing at
least three nominees for each position.  These nominees shall
represent taxpayers or employers and may not be members of the system.

4.  One
member who represents counties in this state and who is appointed by the
governor.  An association representing county supervisors in this
state shall forward nominations to the governor, providing at least three
nominees for the position.  These nominees shall represent taxpayers
or employers and may not be members of the system.

5.  One
member who is appointed by the governor from a list of three nominees forwarded
by the board.  The board shall select the nominees to forward to the
governor from a list of at least five nominees received from the advisory
committee.

B.  Each
appointment made pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be chosen from
the list of nominees provided to the appointing elected official.  For any appointment made by the governor pursuant to subsection A of
this section, before appointment by the governor, a prospective member of the
board shall submit a full set of fingerprints to the governor for the purpose
of obtaining a state and federal criminal records check pursuant to section
41-1750 and Public Law 92-544.  The department of public safety may
exchange this fingerprint data with the federal bureau of
investigation.  A board member may be reappointed.
Notwithstanding section 38‑295, a board member may be removed from office
only for cause by the appointing power or because the board member has vacated
the member's seat on the board.  A board member who is removed for cause shall
be provided written notice and an opportunity for a response.  The appointing
power may remove a board member based on written findings that specify the
reason for removal.  Any vacancy that occurs other than by expiration of a term
shall be filled for the balance of the term.  All vacancies shall be
filled in the same manner as the initial appointment.  A board member vacates
the office if the member either:

1.  Is
absent without excuse from three consecutive regular meetings of the board.

2.  Resigns,
dies or becomes unable to perform board member duties.

C.  The
members of the board who are appointed pursuant to subsection A of this section
and who are not members of the system shall be independent, qualified
professionals who are responsible for the performance of fiduciary duties and
other responsibilities required to preserve and protect the fund and shall have
at least ten years' substantial experience as any one or a combination of the
following:

1.  A
portfolio manager acting in a fiduciary capacity.

2.  A
securities analyst.

3.  A
senior executive or principal of a trust institution, investment organization
or endowment fund acting either in a management or an investment‑related
capacity.

4.  A
chartered financial analyst in good standing as determined by the chartered
financial analyst institute.

5.  A
current or former professor or instructor at the college or university level in
the field of economics, finance, actuarial science, accounting or pension‑related
subjects.

6.  An
economist.

7.  Any
other senior executive engaged in the field of public or private finances or
with experience with public pension systems.

8.  A
senior executive in insurance, banking, underwriting, auditing, human resources
or risk management.

D.  All
monies in the fund shall be deposited and held in a public safety personnel retirement
system depository.  Monies in the fund shall be disbursed from the depository
separate and apart from all monies or funds of this state and the agencies,
instrumentalities and subdivisions of this state, except that the board may
commingle the assets of the fund and the assets of all other plans entrusted to
its management in one or more group trusts, subject to the crediting of
receipts and earnings and charging of payments to the appropriate employer,
system or plan.  The monies shall be secured by the depository in
which they are deposited and held to the same extent and in the same manner as
required by the general depository law of this state.  For purposes
of making the decision to invest in securities owned by the fund or any plan or
trust administered by the board, the fund and assets of the plans and the
plans' trusts are subject to the sole management of the board for the purpose
of this article except that, on the board's election to invest in a particular
security or make a particular investment, the assets comprising the security or
investment may be chosen and managed by third parties approved by the board. 
The board may invest in portfolios of securities chosen and managed by a third
party.  The board's decision to invest in securities such as mutual funds,
commingled investment funds, exchange traded funds, private equity or venture
capital limited partnerships, real estate limited partnerships or limited
liability companies and real estate investment trusts whose assets are chosen and
managed by third parties does not constitute an improper delegation of the
board's investment authority.

E.  All
contributions under this system and other retirement plans that the board
administers shall be forwarded to the board and shall be held, invested and
reinvested by the board as provided in this article. All property and monies of
the fund and other retirement plans that the board administers, including
income from investments and from all other sources, shall be retained for the
exclusive benefit of members, as provided in the system and other retirement
plans that the board administers, and shall be used to pay benefits to members
or their beneficiaries or to pay expenses of operation and administration of
the system and fund and other retirement plans that the board administers.

F.  The
board shall have the full power in its sole discretion to invest and reinvest,
alter and change the monies accumulated under the system and other retirement
plans and trusts that the board administers as provided in this
article.  In addition to its power to make investments managed by
others, the board may delegate the authority the board deems necessary and
prudent to investment management pursuant to section 38‑848.03, as well
as to the administrator, employed by the board pursuant to subsection M,
paragraph 6 of this section, and any assistant administrators to invest the
monies of the system and other retirement plans and trusts that the board
administers if the administrator, investment management and any assistant
administrators follow the investment policies that are adopted by the board.
The board may commingle securities and monies of the fund, the elected
officials' retirement plan, the corrections officer retirement plan and other
plans or monies entrusted to its care, subject to the crediting of receipts and
earnings and charging of payments to the account of the appropriate employer,
system or plan.  In making every investment, the board shall exercise
the judgment and care under the circumstances then prevailing that persons of
ordinary prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in the management of
their own affairs, not in regard to speculation but in regard to the permanent
disposition of their funds, considering the probable income from their funds as
well as the probable safety of their capital, provided:

1.  That
not more than eighty percent of the combined assets of the system or other
plans that the board manages shall be invested at any given time in corporate
stocks, based on cost value of such stocks irrespective of capital
appreciation.

2.  That
no more than five percent of the combined assets of the system or other plans
that the board manages shall be invested in corporate stock issued by any one
corporation, other than corporate stock issued by corporations chartered by the
United States government or corporate stock issued by a bank or insurance
company.

3.  That
not more than five percent of the voting stock of any one corporation shall be
owned by the system and other plans that the board administers, except that
this limitation does not apply to membership interests in limited liability
companies.

4.  That
corporate stocks and exchange traded funds eligible for direct purchase shall
be restricted to stocks and exchange traded funds that, except for bank stocks,
insurance stocks, stocks acquired for coinvestment in connection with the
system's or the plans' or trusts' commingled investments and interests in
limited liability companies and mutual funds, are either:

(a)  Listed
or approved on issuance for listing on an exchange registered under the
securities exchange act of 1934, as amended (15 United States Code sections 78a
through 78pp).

(b)  Designated
or approved on notice of issuance for designation on the national market system
of a national securities association registered under the securities exchange
act of 1934, as amended (15 United States Code sections 78a through 78pp).

(c)  Listed
or approved on issuance for listing on an exchange registered under the laws of
this state or any other state.

(d)  Listed
or approved on issuance for listing on an exchange of a foreign country with
which the United States is maintaining diplomatic relations at the time of
purchase, except that no more than twenty percent of the combined assets of the
system and other plans that the board manages shall be invested in foreign
securities, based on the cost value of the stocks irrespective of capital
appreciation.

(e)  An
exchange traded fund that is recommended by the chief investment officer of the
system, that is registered under the investment company act of 1940 (15 United
States Code sections 80a-1 through 80a-64) and that is both traded on a public
exchange and based on a publicly recognized index.

G.  Notwithstanding
any other law, the board shall not be required to invest in any type of
investment that is dictated or required by any entity of the federal government
and that is intended to fund economic development projects, public works or
social programs, but may consider such economically targeted investments
pursuant to its fiduciary responsibility.  The board, on behalf of the system
and all other plans or trusts the board administers, may invest in, lend monies
to or guarantee the repayment of monies by a limited liability company, limited
partnership, joint venture, partnership, limited liability partnership or trust
in which the system and plans or trusts have a financial interest, whether the
entity is closely held or publicly traded and that, in turn, may be engaged in
any lawful activity, including venture capital, private equity, the ownership,
development, management, improvement or operation of real property and any
improvements or businesses on real property or the lending of monies.

H.  Conference
call meetings of the board that are held for investment purposes only are not
subject to chapter 3, article 3.1 of this title, except that the board shall
maintain minutes of these conference call meetings and make them available for
public inspection within twenty‑four hours after the meeting.  The board
shall review the minutes of each conference call meeting and shall ratify all
legal actions taken during each conference call meeting at the next scheduled
meeting of the board.

I.  The
board shall not be held liable for the exercise of more than ordinary care and
prudence in the selection of investments and performance of its duties under
the system and shall not be limited to so‑called "legal investments
for trustees", but all monies of the system and other plans that the board
administers shall be invested subject to all of the conditions, limitations and
restrictions imposed by law.

J.  Except
as provided in subsection F of this section, the board may:

1.  Invest
and reinvest the principal and income of all assets that the board manages without
distinction between principal and income.

2.  Sell,
exchange, convey, transfer or otherwise dispose of any investments made on
behalf of the system or other plans the board administers in the name of the
system or plans by private contract or at public auction.

3.  Also:

(a)  Vote on any stocks,
bonds or other securities.

(b)  Give
general or special proxies or powers of attorney with or without power of
substitution.

(c)  Exercise
any conversion privileges, subscription rights or other options and make any
payments incidental to the exercise of the conversion privileges, subscription
rights or other options.

(d)  Consent
to or otherwise participate in corporate reorganizations or other changes
affecting corporate securities, delegate discretionary powers and pay any
assessments or charges in connection therewith.

(e)  Generally
exercise any of the powers of an owner with respect to stocks, bonds,
securities or other investments held in or owned by the system or other plans
whose assets the board administers.

4.  Make,
execute, acknowledge and deliver any other instruments that may be necessary or
appropriate to carry out the powers granted in this section.

5.  Register
any investment held by the system or other plans whose assets the board
administers in the name of the system or plan or in the name of a nominee or
trust.

6.  At
the expense of the system or other plans that the board administers, enter into
an agreement with any bank or banks for the safekeeping and handling of
securities and other investments coming into the possession of the board.  The
agreement shall be entered into under terms and conditions that secure the
proper safeguarding, inventory, withdrawal and handling of the securities and
other investments.  No access to and no deposit or withdrawal of the
securities from any place of deposit selected by the board shall be permitted
or made except as the terms of the agreement may provide.

7.  Appear
before local boards and the courts of this state and political subdivisions of
this state through counsel or appointed representative to protect the fund or
the assets of other plans that the board administers.  The board is
not responsible for the actions or omissions of the local boards under this
system but may seek a review or rehearing of actions or omissions of local
boards.  The board does not have a duty to review actions of the
local boards but may do so in its discretion in order to protect the
fund.  No limitations period precludes the board or administrator from
contesting, or requires the board or administrator to implement or comply with,
a local board decision that violates the internal revenue code or that
threatens to impair the tax qualified status of the system or any plan
administered by the board or administrator.

8.  Empower
the fund administrator to take actions on behalf of the board that are
necessary for the protection and administration of the fund or the assets of
other plans that the board administers pursuant to the guidelines of the board.

9.  Do
all acts, whether or not expressly authorized, that may be deemed necessary or
proper for the protection of the investments held in the fund or owned by other
plans or trusts that the board administers.

10.  Settle
threatened or actual litigation against any system or plan that the board
administers.

K.  Investment
expenses and operation and administrative expenses of the board shall be
accounted for separately and allocated against investment income.

L.  The
board, as soon as possible within a period of six months following the close of
any fiscal year, shall transmit to the governor and the legislature a
comprehensive annual financial report on the operation of the system and other
plans that the board administers containing, among other things:

1.  A balance sheet.

2.  A statement of
income and expenditures for the year.

3.  A
report on an actuarial valuation of its assets and liabilities.

4.  A
list of investments owned.

5.  The
total rate of return, yield on cost, and percent of cost to market value of the
fund and the assets of other plans that the board administers.

6.  Any
other statistical and financial data that may be necessary for the proper
understanding of the financial condition of the system and other plans that the
board administers and the results of their operations.  A synopsis of
the annual report shall be published for the information of members of the
system, the elected officials' retirement plan or the corrections officer
retirement plan.

7.  An
analysis of the long‑term level percent of employer contributions and
compensation structure and whether the funding methodology is sufficient to pay
one hundred percent of the unfunded accrued liability under the elected
officials' retirement plan.

8.  An
estimate of the aggregate employer contribution rate for the public safety
personnel retirement system for the next ten fiscal years and an estimate of
the aggregate employer contribution rate for the corrections officer retirement
plan for the next ten fiscal years.

9.  An
estimate of the employer contribution rates for the next ten fiscal years for
each of the following employers within the public safety personnel retirement
system:

(a)  Department
of liquor licenses and control.

(b)  Department
of public safety.

(c)  Northern
Arizona university.

(d)  University
of Arizona.

(e)  Arizona
state university.

(f)  Arizona
game and fish department.

(g)  Department
of law.

(h)  Department
of emergency and military affairs.

(i)  Arizona
state parks board.

10.  An
estimate of the employer contribution rates for the next ten fiscal years for
each of the following employers within the corrections officer retirement plan:

(a)  State
department of corrections.

(b)  Department
of public safety.

(c)  The
judiciary.

(d)  Department
of juvenile corrections.

11.  An
estimate of the aggregate fees paid for private equity investments, including
management fees and performance fees.

M.  The
board shall:

1.  Maintain
the accounts of the system and other plans that the board administers and issue
statements to each employer annually and to each member who may request it.

2.  Report
the results of the actuarial valuations to the local boards and employers.

3.  Contract
on a fee basis with an independent investment counsel to advise the board in
the investment management of the fund and assets of other plans that the board
administers and with an independent auditing firm to audit the board's
accounting.

4.  Permit
the auditor general to make an annual audit and transmit the results to the
governor and the legislature.

5.  Contract
on a fee basis with an actuary who shall make actuarial valuations of the
system and other plans that the board administers, be the technical adviser of
the board on matters regarding the operation of the funds created by the
provisions of the system, the elected officials' retirement plan, the
corrections officer retirement plan and the public safety cancer insurance
policy program and perform other duties required in connection
therewith.  The actuary must be a member of a nationally recognized
association or society of actuaries.

6.  Employ,
as administrator, a person, state department or other body to serve at the
pleasure of the board.

7.  Establish
procedures and guidelines for contracts with actuaries, auditors, investment
counsel and legal counsel and for safeguarding of securities.

N.  The
administrator, under the direction of the board, shall:

1.  Administer
this article.

2.  Be
responsible for the recruitment, hiring and day‑to‑day management
of employees.

3.  Invest
the monies of the system and other plans that the board administers as the
board deems necessary and prudent as provided in subsections F and J of this
section and subject to the investment policies and fund objectives adopted by
the board.

4.  Establish
and maintain an adequate system of accounts and records for the system and
other plans that the board administers, which shall be integrated with the
accounts, records and procedures of the employers so that the system and other
plans that the board administers operates most effectively and at minimum
expense and that duplication of records and accounts is avoided.

5.  In
accordance with the board's governance policy and procedures and the budget
adopted by the board, hire such employees and services the administrator deems
necessary and prescribe their duties, including the hiring of one or more
assistant administrators to manage the system's operations, investments and
legal affairs.

6.  Be
responsible for income, the collection of the income and the accuracy of all
expenditures.

7.  Recommend
to the board annual contracts for the system's actuary, auditor, investment
counsel, legal counsel and safeguarding of securities.

8.  Perform
additional duties and powers prescribed by the board and delegated to the
administrator.

O.  The
system is an independent trust fund and the board is not subject to title 41,
chapter 6.  Contracts for goods and services approved by the board are not
subject to title 41, chapter 23.  As an independent trust fund whose assets are
separate and apart from all other monies funds
of this state, the system and the board are not subject to the
restrictions prescribed in section 35‑154 or article IX, sections 5 and
8, Constitution of Arizona.  Loans, guarantees, investment management
agreements and investment contracts that are entered into by the board are
contracts memorializing obligations or interests in securities that the board
has concluded, after thorough due diligence, do not involve investments in
Sudan or Iran or otherwise provide support to terrorists or in any way
facilitate illegal immigration into the United States.  These
contracts do not involve the procurement, supply or provision of goods,
equipment, labor, materials or services that would require the warranties
required by section 41‑4401.

P.  The
board, the administrator, the assistant administrators and all persons employed
by them are subject to title 41, chapter 4, article 4.  The
administrator, assistant administrators and other employees of the board are
entitled to receive compensation pursuant to section 38‑611. 

Q.  In
consultation with the director of the department of administration, the board
may enter into employment agreements and establish the terms of those
agreements with persons holding any of the following system positions:

1.  Administrator.

2.  Deputy
or assistant administrator.

3.  Chief
investment officer.

4.  Deputy
chief investment officer.

5.  Fiduciary
or investment counsel.

R.  The
attorney general or an attorney approved by the attorney general and paid by
the fund shall be the attorney for the board and shall represent the board in
any legal proceeding or forum that the board deems appropriate.  The
board, administrator, assistant administrators and employees of the board are
not personally liable for any acts done in their official capacity in good
faith reliance on the written opinions of the board's attorney.

S.  At
least once in each five‑year period after the effective date, the actuary
shall make an actuarial investigation into the mortality, service and
compensation experience of the members and beneficiaries of the system and
other plans that the board administers and shall make a special valuation of
the assets and liabilities of the monies of the system and
plans.  Taking into account the results of the investigation and special
valuation, the board shall adopt for the system and other plans that the board
administers those mortality, service and other tables deemed necessary.

T.  On
the basis of the tables the board adopts, the actuary shall make a valuation of
the assets and liabilities of the funds of the system and other plans that the
board administers not less frequently than every year.  By November 1 of each
year the board shall provide a preliminary report and by December 15 of each
year provide a final report to the governor, the speaker of the house of
representatives and the president of the senate on the contribution rate for
the ensuing fiscal year.

U.  Neither
the board nor any member or employee of the board shall directly or indirectly,
for himself or as an agent, in any manner use the monies or deposits of the
fund except to make current and necessary payments, nor shall the board or any
member or employee become an endorser or surety or in any manner an obligor for
monies loaned by or borrowed from the fund or the assets of any other plans
that the board administers.

V.  Financial
or commercial information that is provided to the board, employees of the board
and attorneys of the board in connection with investments in which the board
has invested or investments the board has considered for investment is
confidential, proprietary and not a public record if the information is
information that would customarily not be released to the public by the person
or entity from whom the information was obtained.

W.  A
person who is a dealer as defined in section 44‑1801 and who is involved
in securities or investments related to the board's investments is not eligible
to serve on the board.

X.  Beginning
January 1, 2017, the public safety personnel retirement system advisory
committee is established and shall serve as a liaison between the board and the
members and employers of the system.  The committee shall be appointed by the
chairperson of the board from names submitted to the chairperson by
associations representing law enforcement, firefighters, state government,
counties, cities and towns and tribal governments.  The committee shall select
a chairperson from among its members each calendar year.  The committee shall
consist of the following ten members:

1.  A
member who is a law enforcement officer.

2.  A
member who is a firefighter.

3.  A
member of the elected officials' retirement plan.

4.  A
member of the corrections officer retirement plan.

5.  A
retiree from the public safety personnel retirement system.

6.  A
representative from a city or town in this state.

7.  A
representative from a county in this state.

8.  A
representative from a fire district in this state.

9.  A
representative from a state employer.

10.  A
representative from a tribal government located in this state. END_STATUTE

Sec. 21.  Section 41-101, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-101.  Powers
and duties; attestation of acts of governor; salary

A.  The
governor has the powers and shall perform the duties as prescribed in this
article.  The governor:

1.  Shall
supervise the official conduct of all executive and ministerial officers.

2.  Shall
see that all offices are filled and the duties performed or, in default, invoke
such remedy as the law allows.

3.  Shall
appoint a private secretary to the governor and shall appoint all officers of
this state not made elective, unless otherwise provided.

4.  Shall
be the sole official means of communication between this state and the
government of any other state or the United States.

5.  May
direct the attorney general to appear on behalf of this state when any action
or legal proceeding is pending which that affects
the title of this state to any property or which that may result in a claim against this state.

6.  May
require the attorney general, or any county attorney, to inquire into the
affairs or management of any corporation doing business in this state.

7.  May
require the attorney general to aid a county attorney in the discharge of his
duties.

8.  May
offer rewards for escaped insane persons, not exceeding five hundred dollars.

9.  May
require any officer or board to make special reports to him upon
on demand in writing.

10.  May
convene the legislature at some other place when the seat of government becomes
dangerous from disease or a common enemy.

11.  May
enter into intergovernmental agreements with officers, agencies or departments
of the United States to provide funding or other resources available from any
related state agency, board or commission for the purpose of operating federal
parks located in this state during any period when such parks would otherwise
be subject to shutdown due to a lack of federal appropriation and as deemed
necessary to promote tourism, this state's economic well‑being, or the
health, safety or welfare of the state's citizens.  The governor
shall not provide general fund appropriations from any related state agency,
board or commission to operate a federal park pursuant to this paragraph for
more than twenty‑one days without the approval of the
legislature.  The joint legislative budget committee shall review any
expenditure of funds or other resources pursuant to this paragraph.

12.  Has
such powers and shall perform such other duties as devolve upon on him by law.

B.  All
official acts of the governor, except approval of the laws, shall be attested
by the secretary of state.

C.  The
governor is eligible to receive an annual salary pursuant to section 41‑1904.

D.  Before
an individual is hired as an employee of the office of the governor, that
individual shall submit a full set of fingerprints to the governor for the
purpose of obtaining a state and federal criminal records check pursuant to
section 41-1750 and Public Law 92-544.  The department of public
safety may exchange this fingerprint data with the federal bureau of
investigation. END_STATUTE

Sec. 22.  Section 41-1502, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-1502.  Arizona
commerce authority; board of directors; conduct of office; audit

A.  The
Arizona commerce authority is established.  The mission of the authority is to
provide private sector leadership in growing and diversifying the economy of
this state, creating high quality employment in this state through expansion,
attraction and retention of businesses and marketing this state for the purpose
of expansion, attraction and retention of businesses.

B.  The
authority shall be governed by a board of directors consisting of:

1.  The
governor, who serves as chairperson. 

2.  The
chief executive officer.

3.  Seventeen
private sector business leaders who are chief executive officers of private,
for-profit enterprises.  None of these members may be an elected
official of any government entity.  These members must be appointed
from geographically diverse areas of this state and not all from the same
county.  These members shall serve staggered three-year terms of
office beginning and ending on the third Monday in January.  These members
shall be appointed as follows:

(a)  Nine
members who are appointed by the governor.

(b)  Four
members who are appointed by the president of the senate.

(c)  Four
members who are appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives.

4.  The
following as ex officio members without the power to vote:

(a)  The
president of the senate.

(b)  The
speaker of the house of representatives.

(c)  The
president of the Arizona board of regents.

(d)  The
president of each state university under the jurisdiction of the Arizona board
of regents.

(e)  One
president of a community college who is appointed by a statewide organization
of community college presidents.

(f)  The
chairperson of the governor's council on small business, or its successor.

(g)  The
chairperson of the workforce Arizona council, if
established by executive order pursuant to section 41‑5401.

(h)  One
member of the rural business development advisory council established by
section 41‑1505 who is appointed by the governor.

(i)  The
president of a statewide organization of incorporated cities and towns who is
appointed by the governor.

(j)  The
president of a statewide organization of county boards of supervisors who is
appointed by the governor.

C.  For members who are
appointed by the governor pursuant to subsection B of this section, before
appointment by the governor, a prospective member of the board of directors
shall submit a full set of fingerprints to the governor for the purpose of
obtaining a state and federal criminal records check pursuant to section
41-1750 and Public Law 92‑544.  The department of public safety
may exchange this fingerprint data with the federal bureau of investigation.

C.  D.  The following shall
serve as technical advisors to the board to enhance collaboration among state
agencies to meet infrastructure needs and facilitate growth opportunities
throughout this state:

1.  The
director of environmental quality.

2.  The
state land commissioner.

3.  The
director of the department of revenue.

4.  The
director of the office of tourism.

5.  The
director of the department of transportation.

6.  The
director of water resources.

7.  The
director of the department of financial institutions.

8.  The
director of the Arizona-Mexico commission in the governor's office.

9.  The
director of the office of economic opportunity.

D.  E.  The governor shall
appoint a cochairperson of the board of directors from among the voting
members.  The board may establish an executive committee consisting
of the chairperson, the cochairperson, the chief executive officer, and
additional voting members of the board elected by the board.  The
chairperson may appoint subcommittees as necessary.

E.  F.  The board may request
assistance from representatives of other state agencies to maximize economic
development opportunities by leveraging their access to strategic assets and
planning processes.

F.  G.  Board members serve
without compensation but are eligible for reimbursement of expenses pursuant to
section 41‑1504, subsection E, paragraph 1.

G.  H.  A majority of the
voting members, which must include the chairperson and the chief executive
officer, constitute a quorum for the purpose of an official meeting for conducting
business.  An affirmative vote of a majority of the members present at an
official meeting is sufficient for any action to be taken.

H.  I.  The board of directors
shall keep and maintain a complete and accurate record of all of its
proceedings.  Public access to the board's records is subject to section 41‑1504,
subsection L.

I.  J.  The board of
directors, executive committee, subcommittees and advisory councils are subject
to title 38, chapter 3, article 3.1, relating to public meetings, except as follows:

1.  In
addition to section 38‑431.03, the board of directors, executive
committee and subcommittees may meet in executive session for discussion about
potential business development opportunities and strategies, which, if made
public, could potentially harm the applicant's, the potential applicant's or
this state's competitive position.

2.  Social
and travel events related to the expansion, attraction and retention of
businesses are not public meetings if no legal action involving a final vote or
decision is taken.

3.  Activities
and events held in public for the purpose of announcing the expansion,
attraction and retention of projects are not public meetings.

J.  K.  The board of directors
and the officers and employees of the authority are subject to title 38,
chapter 3, article 8, relating to conflicts of interest.

K.  L.  The board of directors
shall adopt written policies, procedures and guidelines for standards of
conduct, including a gift policy, for members of the board and for officers and
employees of the authority.

L.  M.  The compensation of
all officers and employees is considered a public record pursuant to title 39,
chapter 1.

M.  N.  The authority shall
operate on the state fiscal year.  The board of directors shall cause
an annual audit to be conducted on or before October 31 of each of the
authority's public funds established by this chapter by an independent
certified public accountant.  The board shall immediately file a
certified copy of the audit with the auditor general.  The auditor
general may make such further audits and examinations as necessary and may take
appropriate action relating to the audit or examination pursuant to chapter 7,
article 10.1 of this title.  If the auditor general takes no further action
within thirty days after the audit is filed, the audit is considered to be
sufficient.

N.  O.  All state agencies
shall cooperate with the authority and make available data pertaining to the
functions of the authority as requested by the authority. END_STATUTE

Sec. 23.  Section 41-1750, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-1750.  Central
state repository; department of public safety; duties; funds; accounts;
definitions

A.  The
department is responsible for the effective operation of the central state
repository in order to collect, store and disseminate complete and accurate
Arizona criminal history records and related criminal justice information.  The
department shall:

1.  Procure
from all criminal justice agencies in this state accurate and complete personal
identification data, fingerprints, charges, process control numbers and
dispositions and such other information as may be pertinent to all persons who
have been charged with, arrested for, convicted of or summoned to court as a
criminal defendant for a felony offense or an offense involving domestic
violence as defined in section 13‑3601 or a violation of title 13,
chapter 14 or title 28, chapter 4.

2.  Collect
information concerning the number and nature of offenses known to have been
committed in this state and of the legal steps taken in connection with these
offenses, such other information that is useful in the study of crime and in the
administration of criminal justice and all other information deemed necessary
to operate the statewide uniform crime reporting program and to cooperate with
the federal government uniform crime reporting program.

3.  Collect
information concerning criminal offenses that manifest evidence of prejudice
based on race, color, religion, national origin, sexual orientation, gender or
disability.

4.  Cooperate
with the central state repositories in other states and with the appropriate
agency of the federal government in the exchange of information pertinent to
violators of the law.

5.  Ensure
the rapid exchange of information concerning the commission of crime and the
detection of violators of the law among the criminal justice agencies of other
states and of the federal government.

6.  Furnish
assistance to peace officers throughout this state in crime scene investigation
for the detection of latent fingerprints and in the comparison of latent
fingerprints.

7.  Conduct
periodic operational audits of the central state repository and of a
representative sample of other agencies that contribute records to or receive
criminal justice information from the central state repository or through the
Arizona criminal justice information system.

8.  Establish
and enforce the necessary physical and system safeguards to ensure that the
criminal justice information maintained and disseminated by the central state
repository or through the Arizona criminal justice information system is
appropriately protected from unauthorized inquiry, modification, destruction or
dissemination as required by this section.

9.  Aid
and encourage coordination and cooperation among criminal justice agencies
through the statewide and interstate exchange of criminal justice information.

10.  Provide
training and proficiency testing on the use of criminal justice information to
agencies receiving information from the central state repository or through the
Arizona criminal justice information system.

11.  Operate
and maintain the Arizona automated fingerprint identification system
established by section 41‑2411.

12.  Provide
criminal history record information to the fingerprinting division for the
purpose of screening applicants for fingerprint clearance cards.

B.  The
director may establish guidelines for the submission and retention of criminal
justice information as deemed useful for the study or prevention of crime and
for the administration of criminal justice.

C.  The
chief officers of criminal justice agencies of this state or its political
subdivisions shall provide to the central state repository fingerprints and
information concerning personal identification data, descriptions, crimes for
which persons are arrested, process control numbers and dispositions and such
other information as may be pertinent to all persons who have been charged
with, arrested for, convicted of or summoned to court as criminal defendants
for felony offenses or offenses involving domestic violence as defined in
section 13‑3601 or violations of title 13, chapter 14 or title 28,
chapter 4 that have occurred in this state.

D.  The
chief officers of law enforcement agencies of this state or its political
subdivisions shall provide to the department such information as necessary to
operate the statewide uniform crime reporting program and to cooperate with the
federal government uniform crime reporting program.

E.  The
chief officers of criminal justice agencies of this state or its political
subdivisions shall comply with the training and proficiency testing guidelines
as required by the department to comply with the federal national crime
information center mandates.

F.  The
chief officers of criminal justice agencies of this state or its political
subdivisions also shall provide to the department information concerning crimes
that manifest evidence of prejudice based on race, color, religion, national
origin, sexual orientation, gender or disability.

G.  The
director shall authorize the exchange of criminal justice information between
the central state repository, or through the Arizona criminal justice
information system, whether directly or through any intermediary, only as
follows:

1.  With
criminal justice agencies of the federal government, Indian tribes, this state
or its political subdivisions and other states, on request by the chief
officers of such agencies or their designated representatives, specifically for
the purposes of the administration of criminal justice and for evaluating the
fitness of current and prospective criminal justice employees.

2.  With
any noncriminal justice agency pursuant to a statute, ordinance or executive
order that specifically authorizes the noncriminal justice agency to receive
criminal history record information for the purpose of evaluating the fitness
of current or prospective licensees, employees, contract employees or
volunteers, on submission of the subject's fingerprints and the prescribed
fee.  Each statute, ordinance, or executive order that authorizes noncriminal
justice agencies to receive criminal history record information for these
purposes shall identify the specific categories of licensees, employees,
contract employees or volunteers, and shall require that fingerprints of the
specified individuals be submitted in conjunction with such requests for
criminal history record information.

3.  With
the board of fingerprinting for the purpose of conducting good cause exceptions
pursuant to section 41‑619.55 and central registry exceptions pursuant to
section 41‑619.57.

4.  With
any individual for any lawful purpose on submission of the subject of record's
fingerprints and the prescribed fee.

5.  With
the governor, if the governor elects to become actively involved in the
investigation of criminal activity or the administration of criminal justice in
accordance with the governor's constitutional duty to ensure that the laws are
faithfully executed or as needed to carry out the other responsibilities of the
governor's office.

6.  With
regional computer centers that maintain authorized computer‑to‑computer
interfaces with the department, that are criminal justice agencies or under the
management control of a criminal justice agency and that are established by a
statute, ordinance or executive order to provide automated data processing
services to criminal justice agencies specifically for the purposes of the
administration of criminal justice or evaluating the fitness of regional
computer center employees who have access to the Arizona criminal justice
information system and the national crime information center system.

7.  With
an individual who asserts a belief that criminal history record information
relating to the individual is maintained by an agency or in an information
system in this state that is subject to this section.  On submission of
fingerprints, the individual may review this information for the purpose of
determining its accuracy and completeness by making application to the agency
operating the system.  Rules adopted under this section shall include
provisions for administrative review and necessary correction of any inaccurate
or incomplete information.  The review and challenge process
authorized by this paragraph is limited to criminal history record information.

8.  With
individuals and agencies pursuant to a specific agreement with a criminal
justice agency to provide services required for the administration of criminal
justice pursuant to that agreement if the agreement specifically authorizes
access to data, limits the use of data to purposes for which given and ensures
the security and confidentiality of the data consistent with this section.

9.  With
individuals and agencies for the express purpose of research, evaluative or
statistical activities pursuant to an agreement with a criminal justice agency
if the agreement specifically authorizes access to data, limits the use of data
to research, evaluative or statistical purposes and ensures the confidentiality
and security of the data consistent with this section.

10.  With
the auditor general for audit purposes.

11.  With
central state repositories of other states for noncriminal justice purposes for
dissemination in accordance with the laws of those states.

12.  On
submission of the fingerprint card, with the department of child safety and a
tribal social services agency to provide criminal history record information on
prospective adoptive parents for the purpose of conducting the preadoption
certification investigation under title 8, chapter 1, article 1 if the
department of economic security is conducting the investigation, or with an
agency or a person appointed by the court, if the agency or person is
conducting the investigation.  Information received under this
paragraph shall only be used for the purposes of the preadoption certification
investigation.

13.  With
the department of child safety, a tribal social services agency and the
superior court for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of custodians or
prospective custodians of juveniles, including parents, relatives and
prospective guardians.  Information received under this paragraph
shall only be used for the purposes of that evaluation.  The
information shall be provided on submission of either:

(a)  The
fingerprint card.

(b)  The
name, date of birth and social security number of the person.

14.  On
submission of a fingerprint card, provide criminal history record information
to the superior court for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of
investigators appointed under section 14‑5303 or 14‑5407, guardians
appointed under section 14‑5206 or 14‑5304 or conservators
appointed under section 14‑5401.

15.  With
the supreme court to provide criminal history record information on prospective
fiduciaries pursuant to section 14‑5651.

16.  With
the department of juvenile corrections to provide criminal history record
information pursuant to section 41‑2814.

17.  On
submission of the fingerprint card, provide criminal history record information
to the Arizona peace officer standards and training board or a board certified
law enforcement academy to evaluate the fitness of prospective cadets.

18.  With
the internet sex offender website database established pursuant to section 13‑3827.

19.  With
licensees of the United States nuclear regulatory commission for the purpose of
determining whether an individual should be granted unescorted access to the
protected area of a commercial nuclear generating station on submission of the
subject of record's fingerprints and the prescribed fee.

20.  With
the department of education for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of a
certificated teacher or administrator or an applicant for a teaching or an
administrative certificate provided that the department of education or its
employees or agents have reasonable suspicion that the certificated person
engaged in conduct that would be a criminal violation of the laws of this state
or was involved in immoral or unprofessional conduct or that the applicant
engaged in conduct that would warrant disciplinary action if the applicant were
certificated at the time of the alleged conduct. The information shall be
provided on the submission of either:

(a)  The
fingerprint card.

(b)  The
name, date of birth and social security number of the person.

21.  With
each school district and charter school in this state.  The state board of
education and the state board for charter schools shall provide the department
of public safety with a current list of e‑mail addresses for each school
district and charter school in this state and shall periodically provide the
department of public safety with updated e‑mail addresses.  If
the department of public safety is notified that a person who is required to
have a fingerprint clearance card to be employed by or to engage in volunteer
activities at a school district or charter school has been arrested for or
convicted of an offense listed in section 41‑1758.03, subsection B or has
been arrested for or convicted of an offense that amounts to unprofessional
conduct under section 15‑550, the department of public safety shall
notify each school district and charter school in this state that the person's
fingerprint clearance card has been suspended or revoked.

22.  With
a tribal social services agency and the department of child safety as provided
by law, which currently is the Adam Walsh child protection and safety act of
2006 (42 United States Code section 16961), for the purposes of investigating
or responding to reports of child abuse, neglect or exploitation.  Information
received pursuant to this paragraph from the national crime information center,
the interstate identification index and the Arizona criminal justice
information system network shall only be used for the purposes of investigating
or responding as prescribed in this paragraph.  The information shall
be provided on submission to the department of public safety of either:

(a)  The
fingerprints of the person being investigated.

(b)  The
name, date of birth and social security number of the person.

23.  With
a nonprofit organization that interacts with children or vulnerable adults for
the lawful purpose of evaluating the fitness of all current and prospective
employees, contractors and volunteers of the organization.  The
criminal history record information shall be provided on submission of the
applicant fingerprint card and the prescribed fee.

24.  With
the superior court for the purpose of determining an individual's eligibility
for substance abuse and treatment courts in a family or juvenile case.

25.  With
the governor to provide criminal history record information on prospective
gubernatorial nominees, appointees and employees as provided by law.

H.  The
director shall adopt rules necessary to execute this section.

I.  The
director, in the manner prescribed by law, shall remove and destroy records
that the director determines are no longer of value in the detection or
prevention of crime.

J.  The
director shall establish a fee in an amount necessary to cover the cost of
federal noncriminal justice fingerprint processing for criminal history record
information checks that are authorized by law for noncriminal justice
employment, licensing or other lawful purposes.  An additional fee may be
charged by the department for state noncriminal justice fingerprint processing.  Fees
submitted to the department for state noncriminal justice fingerprint
processing are not refundable.

K.  The director shall
establish a fee in an amount necessary to cover the cost of processing copies
of department reports, eight by ten inch black and white photographs or eight
by ten inch color photographs of traffic accident scenes.

L.  Except
as provided in subsection O of this section, each agency authorized by this
section may charge a fee, in addition to any other fees prescribed by law, in
an amount necessary to cover the cost of state and federal noncriminal justice
fingerprint processing for criminal history record information checks that are
authorized by law for noncriminal justice employment, licensing or other lawful
purposes.

M.  A
fingerprint account within the records processing fund is established for the
purpose of separately accounting for the collection and payment of fees for
noncriminal justice fingerprint processing by the department.  Monies
collected for this purpose shall be credited to the account, and payments by
the department to the United States for federal noncriminal justice fingerprint
processing shall be charged against the account.  Monies in the account not
required for payment to the United States shall be used by the department in
support of the department's noncriminal justice fingerprint processing duties. 
At the end of each fiscal year, any balance in the account not required for
payment to the United States or to support the department's noncriminal justice
fingerprint processing duties reverts to the state general fund.

N.  A
records processing fund is established for the purpose of separately accounting
for the collection and payment of fees for department reports and photographs
of traffic accident scenes processed by the department.  Monies collected for
this purpose shall be credited to the fund and shall be used by the department
in support of functions related to providing copies of department reports and
photographs.  At the end of each fiscal year, any balance in the fund not
required for support of the functions related to providing copies of department
reports and photographs reverts to the state general fund.

O.  The
department of child safety may pay from appropriated monies the cost of federal
fingerprint processing or federal criminal history record information checks
that are authorized by law for employees and volunteers of the department,
guardians pursuant to section 8‑453, subsection A, paragraph 6, the
licensing of foster parents or the certification of adoptive parents.

P.  The
director shall adopt rules that provide for:

1.  The
collection and disposition of fees pursuant to this section.

2.  The
refusal of service to those agencies that are delinquent in paying these fees.

Q.  The
director shall ensure that the following limitations are observed regarding
dissemination of criminal justice information obtained from the central state
repository or through the Arizona criminal justice information system:

1.  Any
criminal justice agency that obtains criminal justice information from the
central state repository or through the Arizona criminal justice information
system assumes responsibility for the security of the information and shall not
secondarily disseminate this information to any individual or agency not
authorized to receive this information directly from the central state
repository or originating agency.

2.  Dissemination
to an authorized agency or individual may be accomplished by a criminal justice
agency only if the dissemination is for criminal justice purposes in connection
with the prescribed duties of the agency and not in violation of this section.

3.  Criminal
history record information disseminated to noncriminal justice agencies or to
individuals shall be used only for the purposes for which it was
given.  Secondary dissemination is prohibited unless otherwise
authorized by law.

4.  The
existence or nonexistence of criminal history record information shall not be
confirmed to any individual or agency not authorized to receive the information
itself.

5.  Criminal
history record information to be released for noncriminal justice purposes to
agencies of other states shall only be released to the central state
repositories of those states for dissemination in accordance with the laws of
those states.

6.  Criminal
history record information shall be released to noncriminal justice agencies of
the federal government pursuant to the terms of the federal security clearance
information act (P.L. 99‑169).

R.  This
section and the rules adopted under this section apply to all agencies and
individuals collecting, storing or disseminating criminal justice information
processed by manual or automated operations if the collection, storage or
dissemination is funded in whole or in part with monies made available by the
law enforcement assistance administration after July 1, 1973, pursuant to title
I of the crime control act of 1973, and to all agencies that interact with or
receive criminal justice information from or through the central state
repository and through the Arizona criminal justice information system.

S.  This
section does not apply to criminal history record information contained in:

1.  Posters,
arrest warrants, announcements or lists for identifying or apprehending
fugitives or wanted persons.

2.  Original
records of entry such as police blotters maintained by criminal justice
agencies, compiled chronologically and required by law or long‑standing
custom to be made public if these records are organized on a chronological
basis.

3.  Transcripts
or records of judicial proceedings if released by a court or legislative or
administrative proceedings.

4.  Announcements
of executive clemency or pardon.

5.  Computer
databases, other than the Arizona criminal justice information system, that are
specifically designed for community notification of an offender's presence in
the community pursuant to section 13‑3825 or for public informational
purposes authorized by section 13‑3827.

T.  Nothing
in this section prevents a criminal justice agency from disclosing to the
public criminal history record information that is reasonably contemporaneous
to the event for which an individual is currently within the criminal justice
system, including information noted on traffic accident reports concerning
citations, blood alcohol tests or arrests made in connection with the traffic
accident being investigated.

U.  In
order to ensure that complete and accurate criminal history record information
is maintained and disseminated by the central state repository:

1.  The
booking agency shall take legible ten‑print fingerprints of all persons
who are arrested for offenses listed in subsection C of this section.  The
booking agency shall obtain a process control number and provide to the person
fingerprinted a document that indicates proof of the fingerprinting and that
informs the person that the document must be presented to the court.

2.  Except
as provided in paragraph 3 of this subsection, if a person is summoned to court
as a result of an indictment or complaint for an offense listed in subsection C
of this section, the court shall order the person to appear before the county
sheriff and provide legible ten‑print fingerprints.  The county
sheriff shall obtain a process control number and provide a document to the
person fingerprinted that indicates proof of the fingerprinting and that
informs the person that the document must be presented to the court.  For
the purpose purposes of this subsection paragraph, "summoned"
includes a written promise to appear by the defendant on a uniform traffic
ticket and complaint.

3.  If
a person is arrested for a misdemeanor offense listed in subsection C of this
section by a city or town law enforcement agency, the person shall appear
before the law enforcement agency that arrested the defendant and provide
legible ten-print fingerprints.  The law enforcement agency shall obtain a
process control number and provide a document to the person fingerprinted that
indicates proof of the fingerprinting and that informs the person that the
document must be presented to the court.

4.  The
mandatory fingerprint compliance form shall contain the following information:

(a)  Whether
ten-print fingerprints have been obtained from the person.

(b)  Whether
a process control number was obtained.

(c)  The
offense or offenses for which the process control number was obtained.

(d)  Any
report number of the arresting authority.

(e)  Instructions
on reporting for ten-print fingerprinting, including available times and
locations for reporting for ten‑print fingerprinting.

(f)  Instructions
that direct the person to provide the form to the court at the person's next
court appearance.

5.  Within
ten days after a person is fingerprinted, the arresting authority or agency
that took the fingerprints shall forward the fingerprints to the department in
the manner or form required by the department.

6.  On
the issuance of a summons for a defendant who is charged with an offense listed
in subsection C of this section, the summons shall direct the defendant to
provide ten‑print fingerprints to the appropriate law enforcement agency.

7.  At
the initial appearance or on the arraignment of a summoned defendant who is
charged with an offense listed in subsection C of this section, if the person
does not present a completed mandatory fingerprint compliance form to the court
or if the court has not received the process control number, the court shall
order that within twenty calendar days the defendant be ten-print fingerprinted
at a designated time and place by the appropriate law enforcement agency.

8.  If
the defendant fails to present a completed mandatory fingerprint compliance
form or if the court has not received the process control number, the court, on
its own motion, may remand the defendant into custody for ten‑print
fingerprinting.  If otherwise eligible for release, the defendant
shall be released from custody after being ten‑print fingerprinted.

9.  In
every criminal case in which the defendant is incarcerated or fingerprinted as
a result of the charge, an originating law enforcement agency or prosecutor,
within forty days of the disposition, shall advise the central state repository
of all dispositions concerning the termination of criminal proceedings against
an individual arrested for an offense specified in subsection C of this
section.  This information shall be submitted on a form or in a manner required
by the department.

10.  Dispositions
resulting from formal proceedings in a court having jurisdiction in a criminal
action against an individual who is arrested for an offense specified in
subsection C of this section or section 8‑341, subsection V, paragraph 3
shall be reported to the central state repository within forty days of the date
of the disposition.  This information shall be submitted on a form or
in a manner specified by rules approved by the supreme court.

11.  The
state department of corrections or the department of juvenile corrections,
within forty days, shall advise the central state repository that it has
assumed supervision of a person convicted of an offense specified in subsection
C of this section or section 8‑341, subsection V, paragraph 3. The state
department of corrections or the department of juvenile corrections shall also
report dispositions that occur thereafter to the central state repository
within forty days of the date of the dispositions.  This information
shall be submitted on a form or in a manner required by the department of
public safety.

12.  Each
criminal justice agency shall query the central state repository before
dissemination of any criminal history record information to ensure the
completeness of the information.  Inquiries shall be made before any
dissemination except in those cases in which time is of the essence and the
repository is technically incapable of responding within the necessary time
period.  If time is of the essence, the inquiry shall still be made
and the response shall be provided as soon as possible.

V.  The
director shall adopt rules specifying that any agency that collects, stores or
disseminates criminal justice information that is subject to this section shall
establish effective security measures to protect the information from
unauthorized access, disclosure, modification or dissemination.  The
rules shall include reasonable safeguards to protect the affected information
systems from fire, flood, wind, theft, sabotage or other natural or man‑made
hazards or disasters.

W.  The
department shall make available to agencies that contribute to, or receive
criminal justice information from, the central state repository or through the
Arizona criminal justice information system a continuing training program in
the proper methods for collecting, storing and disseminating information in
compliance with this section.

X.  Nothing
in this section creates a cause of action or a right to bring an action
including an action based on discrimination due to sexual orientation.

Y.  For the purposes of
this section:

1.  "Administration
of criminal justice" means performance of the detection, apprehension,
detention, pretrial release, posttrial release, prosecution, adjudication,
correctional supervision or rehabilitation of criminal offenders.  Administration
of criminal justice includes enforcement of criminal traffic offenses and civil
traffic violations, including parking violations, when performed by a criminal
justice agency. Administration of criminal justice also includes criminal
identification activities and the collection, storage and dissemination of
criminal history record information.

2.  "Administrative
records" means records that contain adequate and proper documentation of
the organization, functions, policies, decisions, procedures and essential
transactions of the agency and that are designed to furnish information to
protect the rights of this state and of persons directly affected by the
agency's activities.

3.  "Arizona
criminal justice information system" or "system" means the statewide
information system managed by the director for the collection, processing,
preservation, dissemination and exchange of criminal justice information and
includes the electronic equipment, facilities, procedures and agreements
necessary to exchange this information.

4.  "Booking
agency" means the county sheriff or, if a person is booked into a
municipal jail, the municipal law enforcement agency.

5.  "Central
state repository" means the central location within the department for the
collection, storage and dissemination of Arizona criminal history records and
related criminal justice information.

6.  "Criminal
history record information" and "criminal history record" means
information that is collected by criminal justice agencies on individuals and that
consists of identifiable descriptions and notations of arrests, detentions,
indictments and other formal criminal charges, and any disposition arising from
those actions, sentencing, formal correctional supervisory action and
release.  Criminal history record information and criminal history
record do not include identification information to the extent that the
information does not indicate involvement of the individual in the criminal
justice system or information relating to juveniles unless they have been
adjudicated as adults.

7.  "Criminal
justice agency" means either:

(a)  A
court at any governmental level with criminal or equivalent jurisdiction,
including courts of any foreign sovereignty duly recognized by the federal
government.

(b)  A
government agency or subunit of a government agency that is specifically
authorized to perform as its principal function the administration of criminal
justice pursuant to a statute, ordinance or executive order and that allocates
more than fifty percent of its annual budget to the administration of criminal
justice.  This subdivision includes agencies of any foreign sovereignty duly
recognized by the federal government.

8.  "Criminal
justice information" means information that is collected by criminal
justice agencies and that is needed for the performance of their legally
authorized and required functions, such as criminal history record information,
citation information, stolen property information, traffic accident reports,
wanted persons information and system network log searches.  Criminal
justice information does not include the administrative records of a criminal
justice agency.

9.  "Disposition"
means information disclosing that a decision has been made not to bring
criminal charges or that criminal proceedings have been concluded or
information relating to sentencing, correctional supervision, release from
correctional supervision, the outcome of an appellate review of criminal
proceedings or executive clemency.

10.  "Dissemination"
means the written, oral or electronic communication or transfer of criminal
justice information to individuals and agencies other than the criminal justice
agency that maintains the information.  Dissemination includes the
act of confirming the existence or nonexistence of criminal justice
information.

11.  "Management
control":

(a)  Means the authority
to set and enforce:

(i)  Priorities
regarding development and operation of criminal justice information systems and
programs.

(ii)  Standards
for the selection, supervision and termination of personnel involved in the
development of criminal justice information systems and programs and in the
collection, maintenance, analysis and dissemination of criminal justice
information.

(iii)  Policies
governing the operation of computers, circuits and telecommunications terminals
used to process criminal justice information to the extent that the equipment
is used to process, store or transmit criminal justice information.

(b)  Includes
the supervision of equipment, systems design, programming and operating
procedures necessary for the development and implementation of automated
criminal justice information systems.

12.  "Process
control number" means the Arizona automated fingerprint identification
system number that attaches to each arrest event at the time of fingerprinting
and that is assigned to the arrest fingerprint card, disposition form and other
pertinent documents.

13.  "Secondary
dissemination" means the dissemination of criminal justice information
from an individual or agency that originally obtained the information from the
central state repository or through the Arizona criminal justice information
system to another individual or agency.

14.  "Sexual
orientation" means consensual homosexuality or heterosexuality.

15.  "Subject
of record" means the person who is the primary subject of a criminal
justice record. END_STATUTE

Sec. 24.  Section 41-1821, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-1821.  Arizona
peace officer standards and training board; membership; appointment; term;
vacancies; meetings; compensation; acceptance of grants

A.  An
Arizona peace officer standards and training board is established that consists
of thirteen members appointed by the governor.  The membership shall include:

1.  Two
sheriffs, one appointed from a county having a population of two hundred
thousand or more persons and the remaining sheriff appointed from a county
having a population of less than two hundred thousand persons.

2.  Two
chiefs of city police, one appointed from a city having a population of sixty
thousand or more persons and the remaining chief appointed from a city having a
population of less than sixty thousand persons, as reflected by
the most recent United States decennial census.

3.  A
college faculty member in public administration or a related field.

4.  The
attorney general.

5.  The
director of the department of public safety.

6.  The
director of the state department of corrections.

7.  One
member who is employed in administering county or municipal correctional
facilities.

8.  Two
certified law enforcement officers with a rank of patrolman or sergeant, with
one appointed from a county sheriff's office and the other from a city police
department.

9.  Two
public members.

B.  Before
appointment by the governor, a prospective member of the board shall submit a
full set of fingerprints to the governor for the purpose of obtaining a state
and federal criminal records check pursuant to section 41-1750 and Public Law
92-544.  The department of public safety may exchange this fingerprint data
with the federal bureau of investigation.

B.  C.  The governor shall
appoint a chairman from among the members at its first meeting and every year
thereafter, except that an ex officio member shall not be appointed
chairman.  The governor shall not appoint more than one member from
the same law enforcement agency.  No board member who was qualified
when appointed becomes disqualified unless the member ceases to hold the office
that qualified the member for appointment.

C.  D.  Meetings shall be held
at least quarterly or upon on the
call of the chairman or by the written request of five members of the board or
by the governor.  A vacancy on the board shall occur when a member
except an ex officio member is absent without the permission of the chairman
from three consecutive meetings.  The governor may remove a member
except an ex officio member for cause.

D.  E.  The term of each
regular member shall be three years unless a member vacates the public office which that qualified the member for this
appointment.

E.  F.  The board members are
not eligible to receive per diem but are eligible to receive reimbursement for
travel expenses pursuant to title 38, chapter 4, article 2.

F.  G.  On behalf of the
board, the executive director may seek and accept contributions, grants, gifts,
donations, services or other financial assistance from any individual,
association, corporation or other organization having an interest in police
training, and from the United States of America and any of its agencies or
instrumentalities, corporate or otherwise.  Only the executive
director of the board may seek monies pursuant to this subsection.  Such
monies shall be deposited in the fund created by section 41‑1825.

G.  H.  Membership on the
board shall not constitute the holding of an office, and members of the board
shall not be required to take and file oaths of office before serving on the
board.  No member of the board shall be disqualified from holding any
public office or employment nor shall such member forfeit any such office or
employment by reason of such member's appointment, notwithstanding the
provisions of any general, special or local law, ordinance or city charter. END_STATUTE

Sec. 25.  Section 41-5353, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-5353.  Board;
members; terms; meetings; compensation; prohibition

A.  The
authority shall be governed by a board of directors, consisting of five members
to be appointed by the governor, giving due consideration to a diverse
geographical representation on the board, and to serve at the pleasure of the
governor.

B.  Before appointment
by the governor, a prospective member of the board of directors shall submit a
full set of fingerprints to the governor for the purpose of obtaining a state
and federal criminal records check pursuant to section 41-1750 and Public Law
92-544.  The department of public safety may exchange this fingerprint data
with the federal bureau of investigation.

B.  C.  Each member shall
serve for a term of three years.  Vacancies occurring other than by expiration
of term shall be filled in the same manner for the remainder of the unexpired
term.

C.  D.  The board shall
annually elect from among its members a chairperson, a secretary and a
treasurer.

D.  E.  The board rules shall
provide for regular annual meetings of the board.  The chairperson may call a
special meeting at any time.  The board rules shall provide for a method of
giving notice of a special meeting.

E.  F.  The board may meet by
audioconference or videoconference. The requirements of title 38, chapter 3,
article 3.1 apply to an audioconference or videoconference, except that all
votes of members must be by roll call, and the board may not meet in executive
session by audioconference or videoconference.

F.  G.  Members of the board
are not eligible to receive compensation but are eligible to receive
reimbursement for necessary expenses pursuant to title 38, chapter 4, article 2
while engaged in the performance of the members' duties.

G.  H.  Members of the board
may not have any direct or indirect personal financial interest in any project
financed under this article. END_STATUTE

