

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Subject to the requirements of article
IV, part 1, section 1, Constitution of Arizona, section 36-2811, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE36-2811.  Presumption
of medical use of marijuana; protections; civil penalty

A.  There
is a presumption that a qualifying patient or designated caregiver is engaged
in the medical use of marijuana pursuant to this chapter.  The presumption:

1.  The presumption Exists if the qualifying patient
or designated caregiver:

(a)  Is
in possession of a registry identification card.

(b)  Is
in possession of an amount of marijuana that does not exceed the allowable
amount of marijuana.

2.  The presumption May be rebutted by evidence that
conduct related to marijuana was not for the purpose of treating or alleviating
the qualifying patient's debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated
with the qualifying patient's debilitating medical condition pursuant to this
chapter.

B.  Except as provided
in subsection J of this section, a
registered qualifying patient or registered designated caregiver is not subject
to arrest, prosecution or penalty in any manner, or denial of and may not be
denied any right
or privilege, including any civil penalty or disciplinary action by a court or
occupational or professional licensing board or bureau: 

1.  For
the registered qualifying patient's medical use of marijuana pursuant to this
chapter, if the registered qualifying patient does not possess more than the
allowable amount of marijuana.

2.  For
the registered designated caregiver assisting a registered qualifying patient
to whom he is connected through the department's registration process with the
registered qualifying patient's medical use of marijuana pursuant to this
chapter if the registered designated caregiver does not possess more than the
allowable amount of marijuana.

3.  For
offering or providing marijuana to a registered qualifying patient or a registered
designated caregiver for the registered qualifying patient's medical use or to
a registered nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary if nothing of value is
transferred in return and the person giving the marijuana does not knowingly
cause the recipient to possess more than the allowable amount of marijuana.

C.  A
physician shall is not be subject to arrest, prosecution or
penalty in any manner or and may not be denied any right or privilege,
including but
not limited to
any civil
penalty or disciplinary action by the Arizona board of medical examiners or by
any other business, occupational or professional licensing board or bureau,
based solely on providing written certifications or for otherwise stating that,
in the physician's professional opinion, a patient is likely to receive
therapeutic or palliative benefit from the medical use of marijuana to treat or
alleviate the patient's debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated
with the debilitating medical condition.  , but nothing in This chapter prevents does not prevent a professional licensing board
from sanctioning a physician for failing to properly evaluate a patient's
medical condition or otherwise violating the standard of care for evaluating
medical conditions.

D.  No A person may be is not subject to arrest, prosecution or
penalty in any manner,
or
and may not be
denied any right or privilege, including any civil penalty or disciplinary
action by a court or occupational or professional licensing board or bureau,
for:

1.  Providing
a registered qualifying patient, a registered designated caregiver or a
registered nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary with marijuana paraphernalia
for purposes of a qualifying patient's medical use of marijuana.

2.  Being
in the presence or vicinity of the medical use of marijuana authorized under
this chapter. 

3.  Assisting
a registered qualifying patient with administering marijuana as authorized by
this chapter. 

E.  A
registered nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary is not subject to prosecution, ;  search or inspection, except by
the department pursuant to section 36-2806, subsection H, ;  seizure or penalty in any manner
and may not be denied any right or privilege, including any civil penalty or disciplinary
action by a court or business licensing board or entity, for acting pursuant to
this chapter and department regulations rules to acquire, possess, cultivate,
manufacture, deliver, transfer, transport, supply, sell or dispense marijuana
or related supplies and educational materials to registered qualifying
patients, to registered designated caregivers on behalf of registered
qualifying patients or to other registered nonprofit medical marijuana
dispensaries. 

F.  A
registered nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary agent is not subject to
arrest, prosecution, search, seizure or penalty in any manner and may not be
denied any right or privilege, including any civil penalty or disciplinary
action by a court or occupational or professional licensing board or entity,
for working or volunteering for a registered nonprofit medical marijuana
dispensary pursuant to this chapter and department regulations rules to acquire, possess, cultivate,
manufacture, deliver, transfer, transport, supply, sell or dispense marijuana
or related supplies and educational materials to registered qualifying
patients, to registered designated caregivers on behalf of registered
qualifying patients or to other registered nonprofit medical marijuana
dispensaries.

G.  Property,
including all interests in the property, otherwise subject to forfeiture under
title 13, chapter 39, that is possessed, owned or used in connection with the
medical use of marijuana authorized under this chapter or acts incidental to
the medical use of marijuana authorized under this chapter, is not subject to
seizure or forfeiture.  This subsection does not prevent civil
forfeiture if the basis for the forfeiture is unrelated to the medical use of
marijuana. 

H.  Mere
possession of, or application for, a registry identification card may does not constitute probable cause or
reasonable suspicion, nor and may it not be used to support the search of
the person or property of the person possessing or applying for the registry
identification card.  The possession of, or application for, a registry
identification card does not preclude the existence of probable cause if
probable cause exists on other grounds.

I.  No A school, landlord or employer may not be penalized or denied any
benefit under state law for enrolling, leasing to or employing a registered
qualifying patient or a registered designated caregiver. 

J.  A
registered qualifying patient who is serving a term of probation, community
supervision or parole pursuant to a conviction or an ADJUDICATION for an
offense included in title 8, chapter 3, title 13, chapter 34 or title 28,
chapter 4 may be prohibited from possessing or using medical marijuana pursuant
to this chapter as a condition of the person's probation, community supervision
or parole. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Requirements for
enactment; three-fourths vote

Pursuant to
article IV, part 1, section 1, Constitution of Arizona, section 36-2811,
Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended by this act, is effective only on the
affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of the members of each house of the
legislature.

