

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Title 42, chapter 1, article 3, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 42-1116.02, to read:

START_STATUTE42-1116.02.  Department
of revenue tax fraud interdiction fund; uses

A.  The
department of revenue tax fraud interdiction fund is established consisting of
fines collected pursuant to section 42-1127.

B.  the
director shall administer the fund.  Subject to legislative appropriation, the
director shall:

1.  Use
fifty percent of the monies in the fund for the purposes of detecting tax fraud
and enhancing tax fraud analytics.

2.  Transfer
fifty percent of the monies in the fund to the attorney general for prosecuting
cases of tax fraud. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 42-1127, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE42-1127.  Criminal
violation; classification; place of trial; definitions

A.  It
is a class 4 felony to:

1.  Corruptly
or by force or threats of force or injury:

(a)  Attempt
to intimidate, impede or injure an employee of the department acting in an
official capacity.

(b)  Obstruct,
impede or attempt to obstruct or impede the administration of this title or
title 43.

2.  Attempt
by means of bribery, misrepresentation, intimidation or force or threats of
force to obstruct, delay or prevent the communication of information or
testimony relating to a violation of this title or title 43 to an employee or
officer of the department, or knowingly injure another personally or injure the
person's property on account of the person giving, personally or by any other
person, any such information or testimony to an employee of the department.

3.  Make,
forge, alter or counterfeit with the intent to defraud a stamp or meter
impression prepared or prescribed by the department under chapter 3 of this
title, or to knowingly utter, publish, pass or tender as true a false, altered,
forged or counterfeited stamp or meter impression, or to use a stamp provided
for and required by chapter 3 of this title which has already once been used,
with the intent to evade the tax imposed by chapter 3 of this title.

4.  Tamper
with, or cause to be tampered with, any metering machine authorized to be used
under chapter 3 of this title.

B.  It
is a class 5 felony to:

1.  Purchase,
install or use any automated sales suppression device or service or zapper or phantom-ware
with the intent to defeat or evade any tax administered pursuant to this
article that is due or believed to be due by the taxpayer.  In
addition, a person that is convicted of a violation of this paragraph:

(a)  Is subject to a fine
of not more than one hundred thousand dollars or, if a corporation, not more
than five hundred thousand dollars.  Monies paid as fines shall be deposited in
the department of revenue tax evasion interdiction fund established by section
42-1116.02.

(b)  Is liable for all
taxes, fees, penalties and interest due as a result of the person's use of the
automated sales suppression device or service or zapper or phantom-ware.

(c)  Shall forfeit all
profits associated with the person's purchase or use of the automated sales suppression
device or service or zapper or phantom‑ware.

2.  Sell,
license, purchase, install, transfer or possess any automated sales suppression
device or service or zapper or phantom-ware knowing that the purpose of the
device is to defeat or evade any tax administered pursuant to this article.  In
addition, a person that is convicted of a violation of this paragraph:

(a)  Is subject to a fine
of not more than one hundred thousand dollars or, if a corporation, not more
than five hundred thousand dollars.  Monies paid as fines shall be deposited in
the department of revenue tax evasion interdiction fund established by section
42-1116.02.

(b)  Is liable for all
taxes, fees, penalties and interest due as a result of the person's use of the
automated sales suppression device or service or zapper or phantom-ware.

(c)  Shall forfeit all
profits associated with the person's sale or use of the automated sales
suppression device or service or zapper or phantom‑ware.

B.  C.  A first‑time
violation of this subsection may be designated as a class 1 misdemeanor, but
otherwise it is a class 5 felony to:

1.  Knowingly
fail to pay any tax administered pursuant to this article due or believed due
by the taxpayer with intent to evade the tax.

2.  Knowingly
prepare, present or aid, procure or advise in preparing or presenting any
return, affidavit, claim or other document which is fraudulent or is false as
to any material matter, whether or not the falsity or fraud is with the
knowledge or consent of the taxpayer authorized or required to present the
return, affidavit, claim or document.

3.  Simulate
or falsely or fraudulently execute or sign any license or other required
document, or cause the license or document to be falsely or fraudulently
executed or advise or aid in such execution, with the intent to conceal or
cover up a material fact relating to a tax administered pursuant to this
article.

4.  Knowingly
fail to file a return or supply required information, or falsify or conceal a
material fact, document or record, make a false, fictitious or fraudulent
statement or representation or make or use a false writing or document knowing
it to contain a false, fictitious or fraudulent statement or entry, with intent
that the department rely on the false, fictitious or fraudulent statement or
entry in determining tax liability under this article.

C.  D.  A distributor as
defined in section 42‑3001 who violates section 42‑3452, subsection
A, paragraph 2 is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.  If the
distributor is convicted of a second violation of section 42‑3452,
subsection A, paragraph 2, the department may revoke the distributor's license
issued pursuant to section 42‑3401.

D.  E.  A distributor as
defined in section 42‑3001 who violates any provision of section 42‑3401,
section 42‑3452, subsection A, paragraph 1 or section 42‑3456 is
guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.  If the distributor is a licensee under
section 42‑3401 and is convicted of a second violation of section 42‑3456,
the department may revoke the distributor's license.

E.  F.  It is a class 3 felony
for any person to:

1.  Except
as provided in section 42‑3457, transport, in an unstamped or unlawfully
stamped condition, for the purpose of sale ten thousand or more cigarettes that
were subject to the tax imposed by chapter 3, article 2, 6, 7 or 9 of this
title.

2.  Wilfully
sell or offer for sale, in an unstamped or unlawfully stamped condition, ten
thousand or more cigarettes that were subject to the tax imposed by chapter 3,
article 2, 6 or 7 of this title.

3.  Wilfully
sell or offer for sale off an Indian reservation ten thousand or more
cigarettes that are stamped for on‑reservation sales.

F.  G.  For the purposes of
subsection E  F of this section, the possession
or transportation in this state at any time by any person, other than a
licensed distributor, as defined in section 42‑3001, of ten thousand or
more cigarettes in an unstamped or unlawfully stamped condition, other than in
interstate shipment consistent with federal contraband cigarette trafficking
laws (18 United States Code chapter 114), is presumptive evidence that the
cigarettes:

1.  Are
possessed or transported for the purpose of sale.

2.  Are
subject to the taxes imposed by chapter 3, article 2, 6, 7 or 9 of this title.

G.  H.  A person who knowingly
sells a luxury on which the tax has not been paid or accounted for as required
by chapter 3 of this title is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.

H.  I.  A retailer who
possesses any package, bottle or other container containing a luxury which that does not bear the stamps required
to be affixed by chapter 3 of this title is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.

I.  J.  A person is guilty of
a class 3 misdemeanor who:

1.  Is
engaged in the business of selling a luxury, either at wholesale or retail, and
who knowingly refuses or fails to produce on demand by the department invoices
of all luxuries the person purchased or received within two years immediately
before the demand, unless the person shows by satisfactory proof that the
person is unable to do so for reasons beyond the person's control.

2.  Makes
a false entry on an invoice, package or container of luxuries, or who with
intent to avoid the taxes imposed by chapter 3 of this title presents a false
entry for inspection of the department.

3.  Knowingly
prevents or hinders the department from making a full inspection of any place
where a luxury is sold or stored, or knowingly prevents or hinders the
inspection of invoices, books, records or papers required to be kept.

4.  Violates
any provision of this article or an administrative rule adopted by the
department for which no other penalty is prescribed.

J.  K.  The place of trial for
the offenses enumerated in this section is in the county of residence or
principal place of business of the defendant or defendants.  If the
defendant has no residence or principal place of business in this state, the
trial shall be held in Maricopa county.

K.  L.  A person who defrauds
this state by violating any requirement under chapter 3 of this title, with
criminal intent to evade any such requirement, is guilty of a class 4 felony
and shall pay a penalty of three times the retail value of the cigarettes
involved.

L.  M.  A person who knowingly
violates any requirement under chapter 3 of this title, with the criminal intent
to evade any such requirement, is guilty of a class 6 felony.

M.  N.  A person who knowingly
sells or offers to sell off an Indian reservation more than two thousand but
less than ten thousand cigarettes that are stamped for on‑reservation
sales, with the criminal intent to evade the tax imposed by chapter 3 of this
title, is guilty of a class 5 felony.

N.  O.  Any distributor, as
defined in section 42‑3001, who sells or possesses more than two thousand
cigarettes with false manufacturing labels or cigarettes with counterfeit tax
stamps, with the criminal intent to evade any requirement under chapter 3 of
this title, is guilty of a class 5 felony and shall pay a penalty of:

1.  For
a first violation involving two thousand or more cigarettes, two thousand dollars
or three times the retail value of the cigarettes, whichever is greater.

2.  For
a subsequent violation involving two thousand or more cigarettes, fifty
thousand dollars or three times the retail value of the cigarettes, whichever
is greater.

O.  P.  For the purposes of
this section: ,  

1.  "Automated
sales suppression device" means a computer software program that falsifies
the electronic records of electronic cash registers and other point-of-sale
systems, including transaction data and transaction reports.

2.  "Electronic
cash register" means an electronic or computer system that records a
register or supporting data for the purpose of computing, storing or processing
retail sales and other transaction data.

3.  "Luxury" means any
article, object or device on which a tax is imposed under chapter 3 of this
title.

4.  "Phantom-ware"
means hidden or concealed computer software or hardware of an electronic cash
register or other point-of-sale system that can create a second set of records
or eliminate or manipulate transaction records that may or may not be preserved
in digital formats in order to misrepresent the existence or the true record of
a transaction in the electronic cash register.

5.  "Point-of-sale
system" means an electronic device that is used to process card payments
at retail locations.

6.  "Transaction
data" means data relating to a commercial transaction that includes data
identifying each purchased item, the price for each item, a taxability
determination for each item, a segregated tax amount for each taxed item, the
amount of cash or credit tendered, the net amount of change returned to the
customer, the date and time of the purchase, the name, address and
identification number of the vendor and the receipt or invoice number of the transaction.

7.  "Transaction
report" means any means or method of reporting, displaying or generating
transaction data.
END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Section 42-3401, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE42-3401.  Tobacco
distributor licenses; application; conditions; revocations, suspensions and
cancellations

A.  Every
person acquiring or possessing for the purpose of making the initial sale or
distribution in this state of any tobacco products on which a tax is imposed by
this chapter shall obtain from the department a license to sell tobacco
products.  The application for the license shall be in the form
provided by the department and shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty‑five
dollars for each place of business listed in the application.  The form shall
state that the identity of the applicant will be posted to the department's
website for public inspection.  The application for a license shall
include the applicant's name and address, the applicant's principal place of
business, all other places of business where the applicant's business is
conducted for the purpose of making the initial sale or distribution of tobacco
products in this state, including any location that maintains an inventory of
tobacco products, and any other information required by the
department.  If the applicant is a firm, partnership, limited
liability company, limited liability partnership or association, the applicant
shall list the name and address of each of the applicant's
members.  If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall
list the name and address of the applicant's officers and any person who
directly or indirectly owns an aggregate amount of ten percent or more of the
ownership interest in the corporation.  If a licensee is a
corporation, firm, partnership, limited liability company, limited liability
partnership or association, the licensee under this subsection shall notify the
department in writing within thirty days after any change in membership, legal
entity status or ownership of more than fifty percent of the total ownership
interest in a single transaction.  If a licensee changes its business
location, the licensee under this subsection shall notify the department within
thirty days after a change in location.  If the licensee is making a
change in its business location by adding or replacing one or more additional
places of business that are not currently listed on its application, the licensee
must remit a fee of twenty‑five dollars for each additional place of
business.

B.  For
the purposes of subsection A of this section, an applicant with a controlling
interest in more than one business engaged in activities as a distributor shall
apply for a single license encompassing all such businesses and list each place
of business in its application.  For the purposes of this subsection,
"controlling interest" means direct or indirect ownership of at least
eighty percent of the voting shares of a corporation or of the interests in a
company, business or person other than a corporation.

C.  The
department shall issue a license authorizing the applicant to acquire or
possess tobacco products in this state on the condition that the applicant
complies with this chapter and the rules of the department.  The license:

1.  Shall
be nontransferable.  A licensee may not transfer its license to a new
owner when selling its business, and any court‑appointed trustee,
receiver or other person shall obtain a license in its own name in cases of
liquidation, insolvency or bankruptcy or pursuant to a court order if the
business remains in operation as a distributor of tobacco
products.  A licensee shall apply for a new license if it changes its
legal entity status or otherwise changes the legal structure of its business.

2.  Shall
be valid for one year unless earlier revoked by the department.

3.  Shall
be displayed in a conspicuous place at the licensee's place of
business.  If the licensee operates from more than one place of
business, the licensee must display a copy of its license in a conspicuous
place at each location.

D.  As
a condition of licensure under this section, an applicant agrees to the
following conditions: 

1.  A
person may not hold or store any tobacco products, whether within or outside of
this state, for sale or distribution in this state by or on behalf of a
distributor at any place other than a location that has been disclosed to the
department pursuant to subsection A of this section.  This paragraph does not
include a person holding or storing tobacco products by or on behalf of the
distributor when the tobacco products are in transit to a distributor or
retailer as part of a lawful sale.

2.  All
tobacco products held or stored, whether within or outside of this state, for
sale or distribution in this state by or on behalf of a distributor: 

(a)  Shall
be accessible to the department during normal business hours without a judicial
warrant or prior written consent of the distributor. 

(b)  May
not be held or stored at a residential location or in a vehicle.

E.  A
person who is convicted of an offense described in section 42‑1127,
subsection E  F is permanently ineligible to hold
a license issued under this section.

F.  The
department may not issue or renew a license to an applicant and may revoke a
license issued under subsection C of this section if any of the following
applies:

1.  The
applicant or licensee owes one thousand dollars or more in delinquent taxes
imposed on tobacco products under this chapter that are not under protest or
subject to a payment agreement.

2.  The
department has revoked any license held by the applicant or licensee within the
previous two years.

3.  The
applicant or licensee has been convicted of a crime that relates to stolen or
counterfeit cigarettes.

4.  The
applicant or licensee has imported cigarettes into the United States for sale
or distribution in violation of 19 United States Code section 1681a.

5.  The
applicant or licensee has imported cigarettes into the United States for sale
or distribution without fully complying with the federal cigarette labeling and
advertising act (P.L. 89-92; 79 Stat. 282; 15 United States Code section 1331).

6.  The
applicant or licensee is in violation of section 13‑3711 or section 36‑798.06,
subsection A.

7.  Pursuant
to section 44‑7111, section 6(a), the applicant or licensee is in
violation of section 44‑7111, section 3(c).

8.  The
civil rights of the applicant or licensee have been suspended under section 13‑904.  An
applicant or
licensee whose
civil rights have been suspended will be ineligible to hold a license for a
period of five years following the restoration of the applicant's or licensee's
civil rights.

G.  In
addition to any other civil or criminal penalty and except as otherwise provided
in this section, the department may suspend or revoke a license issued under
subsection C of this section if the person violates any requirement under this
title more than two times within a three-year period or fails to otherwise
maintain the conditions of licensure in this section. 

H.  The
department shall publish on its website the names of each person who is issued
a license under subsection C of this section, including any trade names or
business names used by the licensee.  The department shall update the
published names at least once each month.

I.  A
person may not apply for or hold a distributor's license if that person does
not engage in the activities described in subsection A of this
section.  In addition to any other applicable penalty, the department
may:

1.  Revoke
the license of any licensee that fails to file a return or report required
under this chapter for twelve consecutive months. 

2.  Cancel
the license of any licensee that fails to incur any tax liability under this
chapter for twelve consecutive months.

J.  Any
suspension, revocation, cancellation or denial of a license issued under this
section by the department must comply with section 41‑1092.11, subsection
B.

K.  Notwithstanding
any other law, for the purposes of subsection F, paragraphs 1 and 2 of this
section, section 42‑1127, subsection C  D and section 42‑3461,
subsection B, if a distributor has listed in its application more than one
place of business, any suspension, revocation, cancellation or nonrenewal of
the distributor's license shall apply only with effect to remove the place of
business or business location at which the activity occurred from the
distributor's license.  If such a removal occurs, the distributor
shall be subject to restrictions that the department prescribes by rule. END_STATUTE

Sec. 4.  Section 42-3453, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE42-3453.  Presumption
of tax on unstamped cigarettes 

Except as
otherwise provided in section 42‑1127, subsection F  G and section 42‑3452,
subsection B, for the purpose of proper
administration and to prevent evasion of the taxes imposed by this chapter,
until the contrary is established, it is presumed that cigarettes that are
sold, distributed, used or consumed by a person in this state, but not placed
in packages or containers on which official tax stamps are affixed, are
intended for first sale by the person and are subject to the taxes imposed by
this chapter. END_STATUTE

