

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 12-114.01, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE12-114.01.  Probation
assessment; deposit

A.  Except
as provided in section 12‑269, in addition to any other penalty, fine,
fee, surcharge or assessment authorized by law, a person shall pay an
assessment of twenty dollars on conviction for a criminal offense or a finding
of responsibility for a civil traffic violation, for a violation of any local
ordinance relating to the stopping, standing or operation of a vehicle, except
parking violations, or for a violation of the game and fish statutes in title
17.

B.  The
monies collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited, pursuant to
sections 35‑146 and 35‑147, in the judicial collection enhancement
fund established by section 12‑113 to be used to supplement monies
currently used for the salaries of adult and juvenile probation and
surveillance officers and for support of programs and services of the superior
court adult and juvenile probation departments.

C.  The
court may waive all or part of the assessment in the same manner and subject to
the same limitations provided for the waiver of surcharges in section 12‑116.01,
subsection F and section 12‑116.02, subsection D  E. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 12-116.02, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE12-116.02.  Additional
surcharges; fund deposits

A.  In
addition to any penalty provided by law, there shall be levied a surcharge shall be levied in an amount of thirteen per cent percent on every fine, penalty and
forfeiture imposed and collected by the courts for criminal offenses and civil
penalties imposed and collected for a civil traffic violation and fine, penalty
or forfeiture for a violation of the motor vehicle statutes, for a violation of
any local ordinance relating to the stopping, standing or operation of a
vehicle or for a violation of the game and fish statutes in title 17.

B.  In
addition to any penalty provided by law, a surcharge shall be levied in an
amount of fourteen dollars on every fine, penalty and forfeiture imposed and
collected by the courts for criminal offenses and civil penalties imposed and
collected for a civil traffic violation and fine, penalty or forfeiture for a
violation of the motor vehicle statutes, for a violation of any local ordinance
relating to the stopping, standing or operation of a vehicle or for a violation
of the game and fish statutes in title 17.

B.  C.  If any deposit of bail
or bond or deposit for an alleged civil traffic violation is to be made for a
violation, the court shall require a sufficient amount to include the surcharge surcharges prescribed in this section for
forfeited bail, bond or deposit.  If bail, bond or deposit is
forfeited, the court
shall transmit the amount
of such surcharge
shall be transmitted by the court surcharges pursuant to subsection F  G of this section.  If
bail, bond or deposit is returned, the surcharge surcharges made pursuant to this article
shall also be returned.

C.  D.  After addition of the surcharge surcharges, the courts may round the total
amount due to the nearest one‑quarter dollar.

D.  E.  The judge may waive
all or part of the civil penalty, fine, forfeiture and surcharge surcharges, except for civil penalties and
fines that are mandatory, the payment of which would work a hardship on the
persons convicted or adjudicated or on their immediate families.  If
a fine or civil penalty is mandatory, the judge may waive only all or part of
the surcharge surcharges prescribed by subsection subsections A and B of this section and section 12‑116.01. 
If a fine or civil penalty is not mandatory and if a portion of the civil
penalty, fine, forfeiture and surcharge surcharges is waived or suspended, the
amount assessed must be divided according to the proportion that the civil
penalty, fine, bail or bond and the surcharge surcharges represent of the total amount
due.

E.  F.  The surcharge surcharges imposed by this section shall be
applied to the base fine, civil penalty or forfeiture and not to any other
surcharge imposed.

F.  G.  After a determination
by the court of the amount due, the court shall transmit, on the last day of
each month, the surcharges collected pursuant to subsections A, and B and C of this section and a remittance
report of the fines, civil penalties, assessments and surcharges collected
pursuant to subsections A, and B and C of this section to the county
treasurer, except that municipal courts shall transmit the surcharges and the
remittance report of the fines, civil penalties, assessments and surcharges to
the city treasurer.

G.  H.  The appropriate
authorities prescribed in subsection G of this section shall transmit the thirteen per cent percent surcharge as required in
subsection A of this section shall be transmitted by the appropriate authorities
prescribed in subsection F of this section to the state treasurer on or before the fifteenth
day of each month for deposit in the medical services enhancement fund
established by section 36‑2219.01.

I.  The
appropriate authorities prescribed in subsection G of this section shall
transmit the fourteen dollar surcharge prescribed by subsection B of this
section to the state treasurer on or before the fifteenth day of each month for
deposit in the crime laboratory operations fund established by section 41‑1772.

H.  J.  Partial payments of
the amount due shall be transmitted as required in subsections F  G, and G H and I of this section and shall be
divided according to the proportion that the civil penalty, fine, bail or bond
and the surcharge surcharges represent of the total amount
due. END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Section 28-3396, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE28-3396.  Court
diversion fee

A.  The
presiding judge of each court shall:

1.  Set
the amount of the court diversion fee that an individual who attends a
defensive driving school may be assessed.

2.  Charge
an individual a forty‑five dollar surcharge if the individual attends a
defensive driving school.

3.  2.  Immediately inform the
supreme court in writing of the amount of the court diversion fee that is
established for the court and the total cost to attend a defensive driving
school.

4.  3.  Immediately inform the
supreme court in writing of any changes in the total cost to attend a defensive
driving school.

B.  Payment
of the court diversion fee and
surcharge is
in lieu of payment of a civil penalty or criminal fine and any surcharge that are is imposed for a traffic violation.

C.  The
driving school shall collect the court diversion fee and surcharge before or at the time an
individual attends the school.  On receipt of the diversion fee, the
defensive driving school shall transmit the fee promptly to the appropriate
court pursuant to procedures prescribed by the supreme court.  On receipt of the
surcharge, the defensive driving school shall transmit the surcharge promptly
to the state treasurer for deposit, pursuant to sections 35‑146 and 35‑147,
as follows:

1.  The
first ten million four hundred thousand dollars in revenue annually in the
crime laboratory operations fund established by section 41‑1772.

2.  All
remaining money in the state general fund. END_STATUTE

Sec. 4.  Section 41-1772, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-1772.  Crime
laboratory operations fund

A.  The
crime laboratory operations fund is established consisting of surcharge monies
deposited pursuant to section 28‑3396 12‑116.02 and monies deposited pursuant to
section 41‑2401, subsection D, paragraph 11.  The department
shall administer the fund.

B.  Subject
to legislative appropriation, monies in the fund shall be used for crime
laboratory or other department operations. END_STATUTE

