

Be it enacted
by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Title 9, chapter 4, article 8, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 9-500.41, to read:

START_STATUTE9-500.41.  Regulation
of rent for seniors 

A
city or town may adopt a rent control ordinance for residential dwelling units
and mobile home spaces that are rented to an individual who is sixty‑two
years of age or older. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Title 11, chapter 2, article 4, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 11-269.19, to read:

START_STATUTE11-269.19.  Regulation
of rent for seniors

A
county may adopt a rent control ordinance or resolution for residential
dwelling units and mobile home spaces that are rented to an individual who is
sixty‑two years of age or older. END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Section 33-1329, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE33-1329.  State
preemption; regulation of rents; exceptions

A.  Notwithstanding
any other provisions provision of law, to the contrary the state legislature determines
that the imposition of rent control on private residential housing dwelling units by cities, including charter
cities, and towns is of statewide concern.  Therefore, the power to
control rents on private residential property is preempted by the this state.  Cities,
including charter cities, or towns shall
do not have the power to control
rents,
except as provided in subsection B of this section.

B.  The provisions of Subsection A shall of this section does not apply to either of the
following:

1.  Ordinances
or resolutions that are adopted pursuant to section 9‑500.41 or 11‑269.19.


2.  Residential property which that is owned, financed, insured or
subsidized by any state agency, or by any city, including A charter city, or town. END_STATUTE

Sec. 4.  Section 33-1416, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE33-1416.  State
preemption; regulation of rents; exceptions

A.  Notwithstanding
any other provision of law, the state legislature determines that the
imposition of rent control on mobile home spaces by counties, cities, including
charter cities, and towns is of statewide concern.  Therefore, the
power to control rents on mobile home spaces is preempted by the this state.  Counties,
cities, including charter cities, or towns do not have the power to control
rents,
except as provided in subsection B of this section.

B.  Subsection
A of
this section does
not apply to either
of the following:

1.  Ordinances or
resolutions that are adopted pursuant to section 9‑500.41 or 11‑269.19.

2.  Mobile home spaces which that are owned, financed, insured or
subsidized by any state agency, or by any county, city, including a charter
city, or town. END_STATUTE

