

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 19-118, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE19-118.  Registered
circulators; requirements; definition

A.  All
circulators who are not residents of this state and, for statewide ballot
measures only, all paid circulators must register as circulators with the
secretary of state before circulating petitions pursuant to this
title.  The political committee that is circulating the petition
shall collect and submit the registrations to the secretary of state.  The secretary
of state shall establish in the instructions and procedures manual issued
pursuant to section 16‑452 a procedure for registering circulators and
shall publish on a website maintained by the secretary of state all information
regarding circulators that is required pursuant to this section. The secretary
of state shall disqualify all signatures collected by a circulator who fails to
register pursuant to this subsection as provided for in section 19‑121.01,
subsection A.

B.  The
registration required by subsection A of this section shall include the
following provisions:

1.  The
circulator consents to the jurisdiction of the courts of this state in
resolving any disputes concerning the circulation of petitions by that
circulator.

2.  The
circulator shall designate an address in this state at which the circulator
will accept service of process related to disputes concerning circulation of
that circulator's petitions.  Service of process is effected under this section
by delivering a copy of the subpoena to that person individually or by leaving
a copy of the subpoena at the address designated by the circulator with a
person of suitable age.

C.  If
a registered circulator is properly served with a subpoena to provide evidence
in an action regarding circulation of petitions and fails to appear or produce
documents as provided for in the subpoena, all signatures collected by that
circulator are deemed invalid.  The party serving the subpoena may
request an order from the court directing the secretary of state to remove any
signatures collected by the circulator as provided for in section 19‑121.01,
subsection A.

D.  Any
person may challenge the lawful registration of circulators in the superior
court of the county in which the circulator is registered.  A challenge may not
be commenced more than ten business days after the date on which the petitions
for which the circulator is required to be registered are filed with the
secretary of state.  The person challenging signatures may amend that
complaint after the secretary of state has removed signatures and signature
sheets as prescribed in section 19‑121.01.  An action pursuant to this
section shall be advanced on the calendar and decided by the court as soon as
possible.  Either party may appeal to the supreme court within five calendar
days after entry of judgment.  The prevailing party in an action to challenge
the registration of a circulator under this section is entitled to reasonable
attorney fees.

E.  The
removal or disqualification of any one or more circulators does not invalidate
the random sample of signatures made pursuant to section 19‑121.01, and
the secretary of state shall not be required to conduct any additional random
sampling of signatures.

F.  For
the purposes of this title, "paid circulator":

1.  Means
a natural person who receives monetary or other compensation that
is based on the number of for obtaining signatures
obtained on a petition or on the number of
for circulating petitions circulated that
contain for signatures.

2.  Does
not include a paid employee of any political committee organized pursuant to
title 16, chapter 6, unless that employee's primary responsibility is
circulating petitions to obtain signatures. END_STATUTE

