

Be it enacted
by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 28-101, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE28-101.  Definitions

In
this title, unless the context otherwise requires:

1.  "Alcohol"
means any substance containing any form of alcohol, including ethanol,
methanol, propynol and isopropynol.

2.  "Alcohol
concentration" if expressed as a percentage means either:

(a)  The
number of grams of alcohol per one hundred milliliters of blood.

(b)  The
number of grams of alcohol per two hundred ten liters of breath.

3.  "All‑terrain
vehicle" means either of the following:

(a)  A
motor vehicle that satisfies all of the following:

(i)  Is
designed primarily for recreational nonhighway all‑terrain travel.

(ii)  Is
fifty or fewer inches in width.

(iii)  Has
an unladen weight of one thousand two hundred pounds or less.

(iv)  Travels
on three or more nonhighway tires.

(v)  Is
operated on a public highway.

(b)  A
recreational off-highway vehicle that satisfies all of the following:

(i)  Is
designed primarily for recreational nonhighway all-terrain travel.

(ii)  Is
sixty‑five or fewer inches in width.

(iii)  Has
an unladen weight of one thousand eight hundred pounds or less.

(iv)  Travels
on four or more nonhighway tires.

4.  "Authorized
emergency vehicle" means any of the following:

(a)  A
fire department vehicle.

(b)  A
police vehicle.

(c)  An
ambulance or emergency vehicle of a municipal department or public service
corporation that is designated or authorized by the department or a local
authority.

(d)  Any
other ambulance, fire truck or rescue vehicle that is authorized by the
department in its sole discretion and that meets liability insurance
requirements prescribed by the department.

5.  "Autocycle"
means a three‑wheeled motorcycle on which the driver and passengers ride
in a fully or partially enclosed seating area that is equipped with a roll
cage, safety belts for each occupant and antilock brakes and that is designed
to be controlled with a steering wheel and pedals.

6.  "Aviation
fuel" means all flammable liquids composed of a mixture of selected
hydrocarbons expressly manufactured and blended for the purpose of effectively
and efficiently operating an internal combustion engine for use in an aircraft
but does not include fuel for jet or turbine powered aircraft.

7.  "Bicycle"
means a device, including a racing wheelchair, that is propelled by human power
and on which a person may ride and that has either:

(a)  Two
tandem wheels, either of which is more than sixteen inches in diameter.

(b)  Three
wheels in contact with the ground, any of which is more than sixteen inches in
diameter.

8.  "Board"
means the transportation board.

9.  "Bus"
means a motor vehicle designed for carrying sixteen or more passengers,
including the driver.

10.  "Business
district" means the territory contiguous to and including a highway if
there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes within any six
hundred feet along the highway, including hotels, banks or office buildings,
railroad stations and public buildings that occupy at least three hundred feet
of frontage on one side or three hundred feet collectively on both sides of the
highway.

11.  "Certificate
of ownership" means a paper or an electronic record that is issued in
another state or a foreign jurisdiction and that indicates ownership of a
vehicle.

12.  "Certificate
of title" means a paper document or an electronic record that is issued by
the department and that indicates ownership of a vehicle.

13.  "Combination
of vehicles" means a truck or truck tractor and semitrailer and any
trailer that it tows but does not include a forklift designed for the purpose
of loading or unloading the truck, trailer or semitrailer.

14.  "Controlled
substance" means a substance so classified under section 102(6) of the
controlled substances act (21 United States Code section 802(6)) and includes
all substances listed in schedules I through V of 21 Code of Federal
Regulations part 1308.

15.  "Conviction"
means:

(a)  An
unvacated adjudication of guilt or a determination that a person violated or
failed to comply with the law in a court of original jurisdiction or by an
authorized administrative tribunal.

(b)  An
unvacated forfeiture of bail or collateral deposited to secure the person's
appearance in court.

(c)  A
plea of guilty or no contest accepted by the court.

(d)  The
payment of a fine or court costs.

16.  "County
highway" means a public road that is constructed and maintained by a
county.

17.  "Dealer"
means a person who is engaged in the business of buying, selling or exchanging
motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers and who has an established place of
business and has paid fees pursuant to
section 28‑4302.

18.  "Department"
means the department of transportation acting directly or through its duly
authorized officers and agents.

19.  "Digital
network or software application" has the same meaning prescribed in
section 28‑9551.

20.  "Director"
means the director of the department of transportation.

21.  "Drive"
means to operate or be in actual physical control of a motor vehicle.

22.  "Driver"
means a person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.

23.  "Driver
license" means a license that is issued by a state to an individual and
that authorizes the individual to drive a motor vehicle.

24.  "Electric
personal assistive mobility device" means a self‑balancing device
with one wheel or two nontandem wheels and an electric propulsion system that
limits the maximum speed of the device to fifteen miles per hour or less and
that is designed to transport only one person.

25.  "Evidence"
includes both of the following:

(a)  A display on a
wireless communication device of a department‑generated driver license,
nonoperating identification license, vehicle registration card or other
official record of the department that is presented to a law enforcement
officer or in a court or an administrative proceeding.

(b)  An electronic or
digital license plate authorized pursuant to section 28-364.

25.  26.  "Farm" means any lands
primarily used for agriculture production.

26.  27.  "Farm tractor" means a
motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm implement for drawing
implements of husbandry.

27.  28.  "Foreign vehicle" means
a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer that is brought into this state other
than in the ordinary course of business by or through a manufacturer or dealer
and that has not been registered in this state.

28.  29.  "Golf cart" means a
motor vehicle that has not less than three wheels in contact with the ground,
that has an unladen weight of less than one thousand eight hundred pounds, that
is designed to be and is operated at not more than twenty‑five miles per
hour and that is designed to carry not more than four persons including the
driver.

29.  30.  "Hazardous material"
means a material, and its mixtures or solutions, that the United States
department of transportation determines under 49 Code of Federal Regulations
is, or any quantity of a material listed as a select agent or toxin under 42
Code of Federal Regulations part 73 that is, capable of posing an unreasonable
risk to health, safety and property if transported in commerce and that is
required to be placarded or marked as required by the department's safety rules
prescribed pursuant to chapter 14 of this title.

30.  31.  "Implement of husbandry"
means a vehicle that is designed primarily for agricultural purposes and that
is used exclusively in the conduct of agricultural operations, including an
implement or vehicle whether self‑propelled or otherwise that meets both
of the following conditions:

(a)  Is
used solely for agricultural purposes including the preparation or harvesting
of cotton, alfalfa, grains and other farm crops.

(b)  Is
only incidentally operated or moved on a highway whether as a trailer or self‑propelled
unit.  For the purposes of this subdivision, "incidentally
operated or moved on a highway" means travel between a farm and another
part of the same farm, from one farm to another farm or between a farm and a
place of repair, supply or storage.

31.  32.  "Limousine" means a
motor vehicle providing prearranged ground transportation service for an
individual passenger, or a group of passengers, that is arranged in advance or
is operated on a regular route or between specified points and includes ground
transportation under a contract or agreement for services that includes a fixed
rate or time and is provided in a motor vehicle with a seating capacity not
exceeding fifteen passengers including the driver.

32.  33.  "Livery vehicle" means a
motor vehicle that:

(a)  Has
a seating capacity not exceeding fifteen passengers including the driver.

(b)  Provides
passenger services for a fare determined by a flat rate or flat hourly rate
between geographic zones or within a geographic area.

(c)  Is
available for hire on an exclusive or shared ride basis.

(d)  May
do any of the following:

(i)  Operate
on a regular route or between specified places.

(ii)  Offer
prearranged ground transportation service as defined in section 28‑141.

(iii)  Offer
on demand ground transportation service pursuant to a contract with a public
airport, licensed business entity or organization.

33.  34.  "Local authority" means
any county, municipal or other local board or body exercising jurisdiction over
highways under the constitution and laws of this state.

34.  35.  "Manufacturer" means a
person engaged in the business of manufacturing motor vehicles, trailers or
semitrailers.

35.  36.  "Moped" means a bicycle
that is equipped with a helper motor if the vehicle has a maximum piston
displacement of fifty cubic centimeters or less, a brake horsepower of one and
one‑half or less and a maximum speed of twenty‑five miles per hour
or less on a flat surface with less than a one percent grade.

39.  37.  "Motorcycle" means a
motor vehicle that has a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and that is
designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground but
excludes a tractor and a moped.

36.  38.  "Motor driven cycle"
means a motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with a motor that produces
not more than five horsepower.

40.  39.  "Motorized quadricycle"
means a self-propelled motor vehicle to which all of the following apply:

(a)  The
vehicle is self-propelled by an emission-free electric motor and may include
pedals operated by the passengers.

(b)  The
vehicle has at least four wheels in contact with the ground.

(c)  The
vehicle seats at least eight passengers, including the driver.

(d)  The
vehicle is operable on a flat surface using solely the electric motor without
assistance from the pedals or passengers.

(e)  The
vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle as defined in section 28‑5201.

(f)  The
vehicle is a limousine operating under a vehicle for hire company permit issued
pursuant to section 28‑9503.

(g)  The
vehicle is manufactured by a motor vehicle manufacturer that is licensed
pursuant to chapter 10 of this title.

(h)  The
vehicle complies with the definition and standards for low‑speed vehicles
set forth in federal motor vehicle safety standard 500 and 49 Code of Federal
Regulations sections 571.3(b) and 571.500, respectively.

37.  40.  "Motor vehicle":

(a)  Means
either:

(i)  A
self‑propelled vehicle.

(ii)  For
the purposes of the laws relating to the imposition of a tax on motor vehicle
fuel, a vehicle that is operated on the highways of this state and that is
propelled by the use of motor vehicle fuel.

(b)  Does
not include a motorized wheelchair, an electric personal assistive mobility
device or a motorized skateboard.  For the purposes of this subdivision:

(i)  "Motorized
skateboard" means a self‑propelled device that has a motor, a deck
on which a person may ride and at least two tandem wheels in contact with the
ground.

(ii)  "Motorized
wheelchair" means a self‑propelled wheelchair that is used by a
person for mobility.

38.  41.  "Motor vehicle fuel"
includes all products that are commonly or commercially known or sold as
gasoline, including casinghead gasoline, natural gasoline and all flammable
liquids, and that are composed of a mixture of selected hydrocarbons expressly
manufactured and blended for the purpose of effectively and efficiently
operating internal combustion engines.  Motor vehicle fuel does not
include inflammable liquids that are specifically manufactured for racing motor
vehicles and that are distributed for and used by racing motor vehicles at a
racetrack, use fuel as defined in section 28‑5601, aviation fuel, fuel
for jet or turbine powered aircraft or the mixture created at the interface of
two different substances being transported through a pipeline, commonly known
as transmix.

41.  42.  "Neighborhood electric
vehicle" means a self‑propelled electrically powered motor vehicle
to which all of the following apply:

(a)  The
vehicle is emission free.

(b)  The
vehicle has at least four wheels in contact with the ground.

(c)  The
vehicle complies with the definition and standards for low‑speed vehicles
set forth in federal motor vehicle safety standard 500 and 49 Code of Federal
Regulations sections 571.3(b) and 571.500, respectively.

42.  43.  "Nonresident" means a
person who is not a resident of this state as defined in section 28‑2001.

43.  44.  "Off‑road recreational
motor vehicle" means a motor vehicle that is designed primarily for recreational
nonhighway all‑terrain travel and that is not operated on a public
highway.  Off‑road recreational motor vehicle does not mean a
motor vehicle used for construction, building trade, mining or agricultural
purposes.

44.  45.  "Operator" means a
person who drives a motor vehicle on a highway, who is in actual physical
control of a motor vehicle on a highway or who is exercising control over or
steering a vehicle being towed by a motor vehicle.

45.  46.  "Owner" means:

(a)  A
person who holds the legal title of a vehicle.

(b)  If
a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease with
the right of purchase on performance of the conditions stated in the agreement
and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or
lessee, the conditional vendee or lessee.

(c)  If
a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession of the vehicle, the
mortgagor.

46.  47.  "Pedestrian" means any
person afoot.  A person who uses an electric personal assistive
mobility device or a manual or motorized wheelchair is considered a pedestrian
unless the manual wheelchair qualifies as a bicycle.  For the
purposes of this paragraph, "motorized wheelchair" means a self‑propelled
wheelchair that is used by a person for mobility.

47.  48.  "Power sweeper" means an
implement, with or without motive power, that is only incidentally operated or
moved on a street or highway and that is designed for the removal of debris,
dirt, gravel, litter or sand whether by broom, vacuum or regenerative air
system from asphaltic concrete or cement concrete surfaces, including parking
lots, highways, streets and warehouses, and a vehicle on which the implement is
permanently mounted.

48.  49.  "Public transit" means
the transportation of passengers on scheduled routes by means of a conveyance
on an individual passenger fare‑paying basis excluding transportation by
a sightseeing bus, school bus or taxi or a vehicle not operated on a scheduled
route basis.

49.  50.  "Reconstructed vehicle"
means a vehicle that has been assembled or constructed largely by means of
essential parts, new or used, derived from vehicles or makes of vehicles of
various names, models and types or that, if originally otherwise constructed,
has been materially altered by the removal of essential parts or by the
addition or substitution of essential parts, new or used, derived from other
vehicles or makes of vehicles.  For the purposes of this paragraph,
"essential parts" means integral and body parts, the removal,
alteration or substitution of which will tend to conceal the identity or
substantially alter the appearance of the vehicle.

50.  51.  "Residence district"
means the territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a
business district if the property on the highway for a distance of three
hundred feet or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and
buildings in use for business.

51.  52.  "Right‑of‑way"
when used within the context of the regulation of the movement of traffic on a
highway means the privilege of the immediate use of the
highway.  Right‑of‑way when used within the context of
the real property on which transportation facilities and appurtenances to the
facilities are constructed or maintained means the lands or interest in lands
within the right‑of‑way boundaries.

52.  53.  "School bus" means a
motor vehicle that is designed for carrying more than ten passengers and that
is either:

(a)  Owned
by any public or governmental agency or other institution and operated for the
transportation of children to or from home or school on a regularly scheduled
basis.

(b)  Privately
owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or
from home or school on a regularly scheduled basis.

53.  54.  "Semitrailer" means a
vehicle that is with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, that
is designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle and that is constructed so that some part of its weight and that of its
load rests on or is carried by another vehicle.  For the purposes of this
paragraph, "pole trailer" has the same meaning prescribed in section
28‑601.

54.  55.  "State" means a state of
the United States and the District of Columbia.

55.  56.  "State highway" means a
state route or portion of a state route that is accepted and designated by the
board as a state highway and that is maintained by the state.

56.  57.  "State route" means a
right‑of‑way whether actually used as a highway or not that is
designated by the board as a location for the construction of a state highway.

57.  58.  "Street" or
"highway" means the entire width between the boundary lines of every
way if a part of the way is open to the use of the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.

58.  59.  "Taxi" means a motor vehicle
that has a seating capacity not exceeding fifteen passengers, including the
driver, that provides passenger services and that:

(a)  Does
not primarily operate on a regular route or between specified places.

(b)  Offers
local transportation for a fare determined on the basis of the distance
traveled or prearranged ground transportation service as defined in section 28‑141
for a predetermined fare.

59.  60.  "Title transfer form"
means a paper or an electronic form that is prescribed by the department for
the purpose of transferring a certificate of title from one owner to another
owner.

60.  61.  "Traffic survival
school" means a school that offers educational sessions to drivers who are
required to attend and successfully complete educational sessions pursuant to
this title that are designed to improve the safety and habits of drivers and
that are approved by the department.

61.  62.  "Trailer" means a
vehicle that is with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, that
is designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle and that is constructed so that no part of its weight rests on the
towing vehicle.  A semitrailer equipped with an auxiliary front axle commonly
known as a dolly is deemed to be a trailer.  For the purposes of this
paragraph, "pole trailer" has the same meaning prescribed in section
28‑601.

62.  63.  "Transportation network
company" has the same meaning prescribed in section 28‑9551.

63.  64.  "Transportation network
company vehicle" has the same meaning prescribed in section 28‑9551.

64.  65.  "Transportation network
service" has the same meaning prescribed in section 28‑9551.

65.  66.  "Truck" means a motor
vehicle designed or used primarily for the carrying of property other than the
effects of the driver or passengers and includes a motor vehicle to which has
been added a box, a platform or other equipment for such carrying.

66.  67.  "Truck tractor" means a
motor vehicle that is designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles
and that is not constructed to carry a load other than a part of the weight of
the vehicle and load drawn.

67.  68.  "Vehicle" means a device
in, on or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn on a
public highway, excluding devices moved by human power or used exclusively on
stationary rails or tracks.

68.  69.  "Vehicle transporter"
means either:

(a)  A truck tractor
capable of carrying a load and drawing a semitrailer.

(b)  A
truck tractor with a stinger‑steered fifth wheel capable of carrying a
load and drawing a semitrailer or a truck tractor with a dolly mounted fifth
wheel that is securely fastened to the truck tractor at two or more points and
that is capable of carrying a load and drawing a semitrailer. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 28-364, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE28-364.  Powers
of the director

A.  The
director may provide technical transportation planning expertise to local
governments when requested, coordinate local government transportation planning
with regional and state transportation planning and guide local transportation
planning to assure compliance with federal requirements.  The planning
authority granted by this subsection does not preempt planning responsibilities
and decisions of local governments.

B.  If
the governor declares a state of emergency, the director may contract and do
all things necessary to provide emergency transportation services for the
residents in the affected areas whether the emergency transportation is by
street, rail or air.

C.  On
a determination that it is in this state's best interest, the director may
authorize payment for necessary relocation costs in advance of work being
performed if an existing facility owned by the United States must be relocated
or adjusted due to construction, modification or improvement of a state
highway.  The director shall base each advance payment on an estimate of cost
of the proposed relocation or adjustment prepared by the federal government and
acceptable to the director and shall base the final compensation on the actual
agreed cost.

D.  The
director of the department of transportation in consultation with the director
of the department of public safety shall develop procedures to exchange
information for any purpose related to sections 28‑1324, 28‑1325,
28‑1326, 28‑1462 and 28‑3318.

E.  The director may
establish a system or process that does all of the following: 

1.  Allows for mailing
notices of service or other legal documents or records of the department
electronically or digitally to a person who consents to receiving these
notices, documents or records through a secure electronic or digital system.

2.  Enables a person to
establish a financial account in the department's database.  The account shall
be accessible by the person or the person's authorized representative to review
statements of all transactions associated with the person's account and to make
prepayments or payments for authorized transactions with the department. 
Notwithstanding any other law, monies in financial accounts established
pursuant to this section that remain unexpended for a period of five years or
more revert to the Arizona highway user revenue fund and shall be distributed
pursuant to section 28-6538.

3.  Allows a person to
comply with the photograph update and proof of vision test requirements
prescribed by section 28-3173 through electronic or digital means that meet the
department's standards.

F.  The director, in
consultation with the Arizona medical board or the state board of optometry,
may do all of the following:

1.  Establish medical
and vision standards for driver license applicants and examinations.

2.  Establish courses of
training, training facilities and qualifications and methods of training for
driver license examining personnel.

3.  Establish procedures
for the certification of driver license examining personnel and driver license
instructors personnel.

4.  Direct research in
the field of licensing drivers.  The director may accept public or private
grants for the research.

5.  Conduct research in
the field of examination or reexamination of licensing individual drivers with
medical or vision problems.

6.  Set minimum vision
standards for the operation of a motor vehicle in this state.

G.  The director may
implement electronic or digital versions of driver licenses, nonoperating
identification licenses, vehicle registration cards, license plates or any
other official record of the department. END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Section 28-442, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE28-442.  Records;
evidence

A.  A certified duplicate is deemed an
original for all purposes and is admissible in evidence without further
foundation in all courts or administrative agencies.

B.  The
display by a person of evidence on a wireless communication device pursuant to
this title does not constitute consent for law enforcement to access other
content of the wireless communication device. END_STATUTE

Sec. 4.  Section 28-448, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE28-448.  Notice
of address or name change; address update; civil traffic violation; definition

A.  If
a person's name or address changes after the person applies for or receives a
driver license or nonoperating identification license or after the person
applies for or receives a vehicle registration or vehicle title, the person
shall notify the department within ten days after the change of the old and new
address or the former and new name and the following:

1.  If
a registration or title is applied for or received, the number of vehicles registered
to the person and the vehicle identification numbers of the vehicles.

2.  If
a driver license or nonoperating identification license is applied for or
received, the person's date of birth and the number of each license held by the
person or a statement that each license is suspended, revoked or canceled.

B.  A
person may notify the department of an address change by telephone, in writing,
in person or by approved electronic means and may notify the department of a name change in person or in
writing.

C.  The
department may update an address in a vehicle registration record or driver
license record if a traffic citation received by the department or records of
another consenting government agency indicate an address change after the date
the address was stated in department records.

D.  A
violation of this section is a civil traffic violation.

E.  For the purposes of
this section, "address" means a legal street address, a post office
box or an electronic or digital address that is provided by a person who
consents to receive services of notice or other legal documents or records of
the department electronically or digitally pursuant to section 28-364. END_STATUTE

Sec. 5.  Section 28-1321, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE28-1321.  Implied
consent; tests; refusal to submit to test; order of suspension; hearing;
review; temporary permit; notification of suspension; special ignition
interlock restricted driver license

A.  A
person who operates a motor vehicle in this state gives consent, subject to
section 4‑244, paragraph 34 or section 28‑1381, 28‑1382 or 28‑1383,
to a test or tests of the person's blood, breath, urine or other bodily substance
for the purpose of determining alcohol concentration or drug content if the
person is arrested for any offense arising out of acts alleged to have been
committed in violation of this chapter or section 4‑244, paragraph 34
while the person was driving or in actual physical control of a motor vehicle
while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs.  The test
or tests chosen by the law enforcement agency shall be administered at the
direction of a law enforcement officer having reasonable grounds to believe
that the person was driving or in actual physical control of a motor vehicle in
this state either:

1.  While
under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs.

2.  If
the person is under twenty‑one years of age, with spirituous liquor in
the person's body.

B.  After
an arrest a violator shall be requested to submit to and successfully complete
any test or tests prescribed by subsection A of this section, and if the
violator refuses the violator shall be informed that the violator's license or
permit to drive will be suspended or denied for twelve months, or for two years
for a second or subsequent refusal within a period of eighty-four months,
unless the violator expressly agrees to submit to and successfully completes
the test or tests.  A failure to expressly agree to the test or successfully
complete the test is deemed a refusal.  The violator shall also be informed
that:

1.  If
the test results show a blood or breath alcohol concentration of 0.08 or more,
if the results show a blood or breath alcohol concentration of 0.04 or more and
the violator was driving or in actual physical control of a commercial motor
vehicle or if the results show there is any drug defined in section 13-3401 or
its metabolite in the person's body and the person does not possess a valid
prescription for the drug, the violator's license or permit to drive will be
suspended or denied for not less than ninety consecutive days.

2.  The
violator's driving privilege, license, permit, right to apply for a license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege may be issued or reinstated following
the period of suspension only if the violator completes alcohol or other drug
screening.

C.  A
person who is dead, unconscious or otherwise in a condition rendering the
person incapable of refusal is deemed not to have withdrawn the consent
provided by subsection A of this section and the test or tests may be
administered, subject to section 4‑244, paragraph 34 or section 28‑1381,
28‑1382 or 28‑1383.

D.  If
a person under arrest refuses to submit to the test designated by the law
enforcement agency as provided in subsection A of this section:

1.  The
test shall not be given, except as provided in section 28‑1388,
subsection E or pursuant to a search warrant.

2.  The
law enforcement officer directing the administration of the test shall:

(a)  File
a certified report of the refusal with the department.

(b)  On
behalf of the department, serve an order of suspension on the person that is
effective fifteen days after the date the order is served.

(c)  Require
the immediate surrender of any license or permit to drive that is issued by
this state and that is in the possession or control of the person.  The law
enforcement agency may do either of the following to a driver license or permit
taken into possession under this subdivision:

(i)  In compliance with
sections 41‑151.15 and 41‑151.19, destroy the driver license or
permit.

(ii)  Forward the driver
license or permit to the department within five days after the issuance of the
notice of suspension.

(d)  If
the license or permit is not surrendered, state the reason why it is not
surrendered.

(e)  If
a valid license or permit is surrendered, issue a temporary driving permit that
is valid for fifteen days.

(f)  Forward
the certified report of refusal, a copy of the completed notice of suspension,  and a copy of any completed temporary
permit and
any driver license or permit taken into possession under this section to the department within five
days after the issuance of the notice of suspension.

E.  The
certified report is subject to the penalty for perjury as prescribed by section
28‑1561 and shall state all of the following:

1.  The
officer's reasonable grounds to believe that the arrested person was driving or
in actual physical control of a motor vehicle in this state either:

(a)  While
under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs.

(b)  If
the person is under twenty‑one years of age, with spirituous liquor in
the person's body.

2.  The
manner in which the person refused to submit to the test or tests.

3.  That
the person was advised of the consequences of refusal.

F.  On
receipt of the certified report of refusal and a copy of the order of
suspension and on the effective date stated on the order, the department shall
enter the order of suspension on its records unless a written or online request
for a hearing as provided in this section has been filed by the accused
person.  If the department receives only the certified report of refusal, the
department shall notify the person named in the report in writing sent by mail
that:

1.  Fifteen
days after the date of issuance of the notice the department will suspend the
person's license or permit, driving privilege or nonresident driving privilege.

2.  The
department will provide an opportunity for a hearing if the person requests a
hearing in writing or online and the request is received by the department
within fifteen days after the notice is sent.

G.  The
order of suspension issued by a law enforcement officer or the department under
this section shall notify the person that:

1.  The
person may submit a written or online request for a hearing.

2.  The
request for a hearing must be received by the department within fifteen days
after the date of the notice or the order of suspension will become final.

3.  The
affected person's license or permit to drive or right to apply for a license or
permit or any nonresident operating privilege will be suspended for twelve
months from that date or for two years from that date for a second or
subsequent refusal within a period of eighty‑four months.

4.  The
person's driving privilege, license, permit, right to apply for a license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege may be issued or reinstated following
the period of suspension only if the person completes alcohol or other drug
screening.

H.  The
order for suspension shall:

1.  Be
accompanied by printed forms that are ready to mail to the department, that may
be filled out and signed by the person to indicate the person's desire for a
hearing and that advise the person that the person may alternatively submit an
online request for a hearing.

2.  Advise
the person that unless the person has surrendered any driver license or permit
issued by this state the person's hearing request will not be accepted, except
that the person may certify pursuant to section 28‑3170 that the license
or permit is lost or destroyed.

I.  On
the receipt of a request for a hearing, the department shall set the hearing
within sixty days.  The department may hold the hearing in person, by telephone
or by videoconference.  If the department holds the hearing in
person, the hearing shall be held in the county in which the person named in
the report resides unless the law enforcement agency filing the certified
report of refusal pursuant to subsection D of this section requests at the time
of its filing that the hearing be held in the county where the refusal
occurred.

J.  A
timely request for a hearing stays the suspension until a hearing is held,
except that the department shall not return any surrendered license or permit
to the person but may issue temporary permits to drive that expire no later
than when the department has made its final decision.  If the person is a
resident without a license or permit or has an expired license or permit, the
department may allow the person to apply for a restricted license or
permit.  If the department determines the person is otherwise
entitled to the license or permit, the department shall issue and retain a
restricted license or permit subject to this section.

K.  Hearings
requested under this section shall be conducted in the same manner and under
the same conditions as provided in section 28‑3306.  For the purposes of
this section, the scope of the hearing shall include only the issues of whether:

1.  A
law enforcement officer had reasonable grounds to believe that the person was
driving or was in actual physical control of a motor vehicle in this state
either:

(a)  While
under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs.

(b)  If
the person is under twenty‑one years of age, with spirituous liquor in
the person's body.

2.  The
person was placed under arrest.

3.  The
person refused to submit to the test.

4.  The
person was informed of the consequences of refusal.

L.  If
the department determines at the hearing to suspend the affected person's
privilege to operate a motor vehicle, the suspension provided in this section
is effective fifteen days after giving written notice of the suspension, except
that the department may issue or extend a temporary license that expires on the
effective date of the suspension.  If the person is a resident without a
license or permit or has an expired license or permit to operate a motor
vehicle in this state, the department shall deny to the person the issuance of
a license or permit for a period of twelve months after the order of suspension
becomes effective or for a period of two years after the order of suspension
becomes effective for a second or subsequent refusal within a period of
eighty-four months, and may reinstate the person's driving privilege, license,
permit, right to apply for a license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege following the period of suspension only if the person completes
alcohol or other drug screening.

M.  If
the suspension order is sustained after the hearing, a motion for rehearing is
not required.  Within thirty days after a suspension order is sustained, the
affected person may file a petition in the superior court to review the final
order of suspension or denial by the department in the same manner provided in
section 28‑3317.  The court shall hear the review of the final order of
suspension or denial on an expedited basis.

N.  If
the suspension or determination that there should be a denial of issuance is
not sustained, the ruling is not admissible in and has no effect on any
administrative, civil or criminal court proceeding.

O.  If
it has been determined under the procedures of this section that a
nonresident's privilege to operate a motor vehicle in this state has been suspended,
the department shall give information either in writing or by electronic means
of the action taken to the motor vehicle administrator of the state of the
person's residence and of any state in which the person has a license.

P.  After
completing not less than ninety consecutive days of the period of suspension
required by this section and any alcohol or other drug screening that is
ordered by the department pursuant to this chapter, a person whose driving
privilege is suspended pursuant to this section may apply to the department for
a special ignition interlock restricted driver license pursuant to section 28‑1401.  Unless
the certified ignition interlock period is extended by the department pursuant
to section 28‑1461, a person who is issued a special ignition interlock
restricted driver license as provided in this subsection shall maintain a
functioning certified ignition interlock device in compliance with this chapter
during the remaining period of the suspension prescribed by this section.  This
subsection does not apply to a person whose driving privilege is suspended for
a second or subsequent refusal within a period of eighty‑four months. END_STATUTE

Sec. 6.  Section 28-1385, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE28-1385.  Administrative
license suspension for driving under the influence or for homicide or assault
involving a motor vehicle; report; hearing; summary review; ignition interlock
device requirement

A.  A
law enforcement officer shall forward to the department a certified report as
prescribed in subsection B of this section, subject to the penalty for perjury
prescribed by section 28‑1561, if both of the following occur:

1.  The
officer arrests a person for a violation of section 4‑244, paragraph 34,
section 28‑1381, section 28‑1382 or section 28‑1383 or for a
violation of title 13, chapter 11 or section 13‑1201 or 13‑1204
involving a motor vehicle.

2.  The
person submits to a blood or breath alcohol test permitted by section 28‑1321
or any other law or a sample of blood is obtained pursuant to section 28‑1388
and the results are either not available or the results indicate any of the
following:

(a)  0.08
or more alcohol concentration in the person's blood or breath.

(b)  0.04
or more alcohol concentration in the person's blood or breath if the person was
driving or in actual physical control of a commercial motor vehicle.

(c)  Any
drug defined in section 13-3401 or its metabolite is in the person's body
except if the person possesses a valid prescription for the drug.

B.  The
officer shall make the certified report required by subsection A of this
section on forms supplied or approved by the department.  The report
shall state information that is relevant to the enforcement action, including:

1.  Information
that adequately identifies the arrested person.

2.  A
statement of the officer's grounds for belief that the person was driving or in
actual physical control of a motor vehicle in violation of section 4‑244,
paragraph 34, section 28‑1381, section 28‑1382 or section 28‑1383
or committed a violation of title 13, chapter 11 or section 13‑1201 or 13‑1204
involving a motor vehicle.

3.  A
statement that the person was arrested for a violation of section 4‑244,
paragraph 34, section 28‑1381, section 28‑1382 or section 28‑1383
or for a violation of title 13, chapter 11 or section 13‑1201 or 13‑1204
involving a motor vehicle.

4.  A
report of the results of the blood or breath alcohol test that was
administered, if the results are available.

C.  The
officer shall also serve an order of suspension on the person on behalf of the
department.  The order of suspension:

1.  Is
effective fifteen days after the date it is served.

2.  Shall
require the immediate surrender of any license or permit to drive that is
issued by this state and that is in the possession or control of the person.

3.  Shall
contain information concerning the right to a summary review and hearing,
including information concerning the hearing as required by section 28‑1321,
subsections G and H.

4.  Shall
be accompanied by printed forms that are ready to mail to the department, that
the person may fill out and sign to indicate the person's desire for a hearing
and that advise the person that the person may alternatively submit an online
request for a hearing.

5.  Shall
be entered on the department's records on receipt of the report by the officer
and a copy of the order of suspension.

6.  Shall
inform the person that the person's driving privilege, license, permit, right
to apply for a license or permit or nonresident operating privilege may be
issued or reinstated following the period of suspension only if the person
completes alcohol or other drug screening.

7.  Shall
contain information on alcohol or other drug education and treatment programs
that are provided by a facility approved by the department of health services.

D.  If
the blood test result is unavailable at the time the test is administered, the
result shall be forwarded to the department before the hearing held pursuant to
this section in a form prescribed by the director.

E.  If
the license or permit is not surrendered pursuant to subsection C of this
section, the officer shall state the reason for the nonsurrender.  If a valid
license or permit is surrendered, the officer shall issue a temporary driving
permit that is valid for fifteen days.  The officer shall forward a copy of the
completed order of suspension,  and a copy of any completed temporary
permit and
any driver license or permit taken into possession under this section to the department within five
days after the issuance of the order of suspension along with the report.  The law
enforcement agency may do either of the following with a valid license or
permit that is surrendered pursuant to this section:

1.  In
compliance with sections 41‑151.15 and 41‑151.19, Destroy the
license or permit.

2.  Forward
the license or permit to the department within five days after the issuance of
the notice of suspension.

F.  The
department shall suspend the affected person's license or permit to drive or
right to apply for a license or permit or any nonresident operating privilege
for not less than ninety consecutive days from that date. If the person is
otherwise qualified, the department may reinstate the person's driving
privilege, license, permit, right to apply for a license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege following the period of suspension only if the
violator completes alcohol or other drug screening.

G.  Notwithstanding
subsections A through F of this section, the department shall suspend the
driving privileges of the person described in subsection A of this section for
not less than thirty consecutive days and shall restrict the driving privileges
of the person for not less than sixty consecutive additional days to travel
between the person's place of employment and residence and during specified
periods of time while at employment, to travel between the person's place of
residence and the person's secondary or postsecondary school, according to the
person's employment or educational schedule, to travel between the person's
place of residence and the office of the person's probation officer for
scheduled appointments or to travel between the person's place of residence and
a screening, education or treatment facility for scheduled appointments if the
person:

1.  Did
not cause death or serious physical injury as defined in section 13‑105
to another person during the course of conduct out of which the current action
arose.

2.  Has
not been convicted of a violation of section 4‑244, paragraph 34, section
28‑1381, section 28‑1382 or section 28‑1383 within
eighty-four months of the date of commission of the acts out of which the
current action arose.  The dates of commission of the acts are the
determining factor in applying the eighty-four month provision.

3.  Has
not had the person's privilege to drive suspended pursuant to this section or
section 28‑1321 within eighty-four months of the date of commission of
the acts out of which the current action arose.

4.  Provides
satisfactory evidence to the department of the person's completion of alcohol
or other drug screening that is ordered by the department.  If the
person does not complete alcohol or other drug screening, the department may
impose a ninety day suspension pursuant to this section.

H.  If
the officer does not serve an order of suspension pursuant to subsection C of
this section and if the department does not receive the report of the results
of the blood or breath alcohol test pursuant to subsection B, paragraph 4 of
this section, but subsequently receives the results and the results indicate
0.08 or more alcohol concentration in the person's blood or breath, a blood or
breath alcohol concentration of 0.04 or more and the person was driving or in
actual physical control of a commercial motor vehicle or any drug defined in
section 13‑3401 or its metabolite in the person's body and the person
does not possess a valid prescription for the drug, the department shall notify
the person named in the report in writing sent by mail that fifteen days after
the date of issuance of the notice the department will suspend the person's
license or permit, driving privilege or nonresident driving privilege.  The
notice shall also state that the department will provide an opportunity for a
hearing and administrative review if the person requests a hearing or review in
writing and the request is received by the department within fifteen days after
the notice is sent.

I.  A
timely request for a hearing stays the suspension until a hearing is held,
except that the department shall not return any surrendered license or permit
to the person but may issue temporary permits to drive that expire no later
than when the department has made its final decision.  If the person is a
resident without a license or permit or has an expired license or permit, the
department may allow the person to apply for a restricted license or permit. 
If the department determines the person is otherwise entitled to the restricted
license or permit, the department shall issue, but retain, the license or
permit, subject to this section.  All hearings requested under this section
shall be conducted in the same manner and under the same conditions as provided
in section 28‑3306.

J.  For
the purposes of this section, the scope of the hearing shall include only the
following issues:

1.  Whether
the officer had reasonable grounds to believe the person was driving or was in
actual physical control of a motor vehicle while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or drugs.

2.  Whether
the person was placed under arrest for a violation of section 4‑244,
paragraph 34, section 28‑1381, section 28‑1382 or section 28‑1383
or for a violation of title 13, chapter 11 or section 13‑1201 or 13‑1204
involving a motor vehicle.

3.  Whether
a test was taken, the results of which indicated any of the following:

(a)  An
alcohol concentration in the person's blood or breath at the time the test was
administered of either:

(i)  0.08
or more.

(ii)  0.04
or more if the person was driving or in actual physical control of a commercial
motor vehicle.

(b)  Any
drug defined in section 13-3401 or its metabolite in the person's body except
if the person possesses a valid prescription for the drug.

4.  Whether
the testing method used was valid and reliable.

5.  Whether
the test results were accurately evaluated.

K.  The
results of the blood or breath alcohol test shall be admitted on establishing
the requirements in section 28‑1323 or 28‑1326.

L.  If
the department determines at the hearing to suspend the affected person's
privilege to operate a motor vehicle, the suspension provided in this section
is effective fifteen days after giving written notice of the suspension, except
that the department may issue or extend a temporary license that expires on the
effective date of the suspension.  If the person is a resident without a
license or permit or has an expired license or permit to operate a motor
vehicle in this state, the department shall deny the issuance of a license or
permit to the person for not less than ninety consecutive days.  The
department may reinstate the person's driving privilege, license, permit, right
to apply for a license or permit or nonresident operating privilege following
the period of suspension only if the violator completes alcohol or other drug
screening.

M.  A
person may apply for a summary review of an order issued pursuant to this
section instead of a hearing at any time before the effective date of the order.  The
person shall submit the application in writing to any department driver license
examining office together with any written explanation as to why the department
should not suspend the driving privilege.  The agent of the department
receiving the notice shall issue to the person an additional driving permit
that expires twenty days from the date the request is received.  The
department shall review all reports submitted by the officer and any written
explanation submitted by the person and shall determine if the order of
suspension should be sustained or cancelled.  The department shall not hold a
hearing, and the review is not subject to title 41, chapter 6.  The department
shall notify the person of its decision before the temporary driving permit
expires.

N.  If
the suspension or determination that there should be a denial of issuance is
not sustained after a hearing or review, the ruling is not admissible in and
does not have any effect on any civil or criminal court proceeding.

O.  If
it has been determined under the procedures of this section that a
nonresident's privilege to operate a motor vehicle in this state has been
suspended, the department shall give information either in writing or by
electronic means of the action taken to the motor vehicle administrator of the
state of the person's residence and of any state in which the person has a
license. END_STATUTE

Sec. 7.  Section 28-2158, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE28-2158.  Registration
card

A.  The
department shall file each application for registration.  If
satisfied that the application is genuine and regular, the department shall
issue a registration card to the owner of the vehicle and shall assign license
plates to the vehicle.

B.  The
registration card shall contain on the face of the card all of the following:

1.  The
date it is issued.

2.  The
registration number assigned to the owner and the vehicle.

3.  The
name and address of the owner.

4.  A
description of the registered vehicle, including the serial number.

5.  The
amount of fees paid for registration of the vehicle.

C.  The
registration card shall be carried at all times in the driver's compartment of
the vehicle for which it is issued or displayed on a wireless communication device.  The registration card
is subject to inspection by the director, members of the highway patrol or any
peace officer. END_STATUTE

Sec. 8.  Section 28-2356, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE28-2356.  Transfer
of license plates to another vehicle; credit

A.  Except
as otherwise provided in this chapter, the owner of a vehicle for which the
department provided license plates pursuant to section 28‑2351 shall
retain those license plates when the owner transfers the vehicle to another
person.

B.  The
owner may apply for a
refund or a
credit that
is posted to the owner's record or financial account of the unexpired portion of the vehicle license
taxes, gross weight fees, commercial registration fees, special plate fees and
motor carrier fees
and
taxes as
prescribed in this section if both of
the following apply:

1.  The
owner makes proper application to the director or to an authorized third party pursuant to chapter
13 of this title.

2.  The
owner agrees to allow the department to deduct a twelve dollar processing fee
from the amount of the refund
or credit.

C.  If
the owner applies for a credit as prescribed in this section, the department
may assign the license plates retained pursuant to subsection A of this section
to another vehicle that belongs to the owner if all of the following apply:

1.  The
other vehicle is of the same vehicle type.

2.  The
owner is applying the available credit for the fees and taxes to one other
vehicle the owner owns or acquires.

3.  If
the available credit exceeds the amount required to pay the fees and taxes, the
department shall issue a refund for the remaining amount of credit as
prescribed in this section.  The department shall not charge an additional
twelve dollar fee pursuant to subsection B of this section for issuing a refund
under this paragraph.

4.  If
the vehicle license tax, gross weight fees, commercial registration fees,
special plate fees and motor carrier fees are more than the similar fees and
taxes required to register the vehicle to which the license plates were
previously assigned, the owner pays any additional fees and taxes required
after subtracting any credit allowed under this section. 

D.  C.  If the other vehicle is not of the
same vehicle type as the vehicle for which the license plates were provided by
the department pursuant to section 28‑2351, the owner shall either
surrender the license plates to the department or an authorized third party or
submit an affidavit of license plate destruction as prescribed by the
director.  On surrender of the license plates or submission of an affidavit of
license plate destruction, the department shall provide new license plates of
the proper vehicle type to the owner and credit the owner with an
amount equal to the unexpended portion of the fees and taxes originally paid by
the owner for registration and license plates toward fees and taxes charged for
the registration and license plates of the appropriate new vehicle type.

E.  D.  The owner of a registered vehicle
who transfers license plates to another vehicle or who claims a refund credit pursuant to this section is
entitled to a credit or
a refund for
the unexpired portion of the fees and taxes paid as required by law in
accordance with the following conditions:

1.  The
fees and taxes are prorated on a monthly basis beginning on the first day of
the registration month following the date of acquisition of the vehicle.

2.  The
credit or
refund shall
be an amount computed as follows:

(a)  If
the vehicle is registered on an annual basis, one‑twelfth for each full
month of the registration period not yet expired.

(b)  If
the vehicle is registered on a biennial basis pursuant to section 28‑2159,
one‑twenty‑fourth for each full month of the registration period
not yet expired.

(a)  For each full month
remaining in the registration cycle, the record or financial account credit
shall be prorated using the assessed value of the vehicle for the year that the
full month is in.

(c)  (b)  If the vehicle is permanently
registered, one‑twenty‑fourth for each full month after acquisition
of the vehicle to the twenty‑fourth month after the date of initial
permanent registration of the vehicle.

F.  E.  If the owner of a registered
vehicle transfers the vehicle to another person but does not transfer the license
plates to another vehicle, surrender the license plates to the department or an
authorized third party or submit an affidavit of license plate destruction apply for a credit within thirty days of the
transfer as required by section 28‑2058, the unexpired portion of the
fees and taxes shall decrement decrease pursuant to subsection D of this
section until the owner either
surrenders the license plates to the department or an authorized third party or
submits an affidavit of license plate destruction applies for the credit.

G.  Except
as provided in subsection C of this section, an owner of a registered vehicle
who transfers the vehicle to another person and either surrenders the license
plates to the department or an authorized third party or submits an affidavit
of license plate destruction may apply to the department for a refund of the
unexpired portion of the fees and taxes paid if the owner does not claim a
credit pursuant to this section and the refundable amount calculated pursuant
to subsection D of this section exceeds the twelve dollar fee prescribed in
subsection B of this section.  If the department determines that the owner is
entitled to a refund, the department shall send the refund by first class mail
to the address provided by the owner claiming the refund or, if no address is
provided, to the latest address listed on the department's records for the
owner claiming the refund.

H.  F.  An owner who transfers license
plates to another vehicle pursuant to this section is subject to the same
penalties for the use of the license plates on another vehicle or for improper
use of the license plates as the owner would have been subject to for use of
the license plates on the vehicle to which the plates were previously assigned.

I.  G.  The owner of a vehicle registered
in this state is not entitled to a credit or a refund pursuant to this section if the
vehicle is registered in another state unless the owner is applying the credit
pursuant to this section to another vehicle the owner owns or acquires for
registration in this state.

J.  The
director shall adopt rules necessary to administer this section. END_STATUTE

Sec. 9.  Section 28-3306, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE28-3306.  Discretionary
license suspension or revocation; traffic survival school; hearing

A.  The
department may suspend or revoke the license of a driver or require a licensee
to attend and successfully complete approved traffic survival school
educational sessions designed to improve the safety and habits of drivers on a
showing by department records or other sufficient evidence that the licensee:

1.  Has
committed an offense for which mandatory revocation of the license is required
on conviction.

2.  Has
been involved as a driver in an accident resulting in the death or personal
injury of another or serious property damage.

3.  Has
been convicted of or adjudged to have violated traffic regulations governing
the movement of vehicles with such a frequency that it indicates a disrespect
for traffic laws and a disregard for the safety of other persons on the
highways.

4.  Has
been convicted of reckless driving as provided in section 28‑693 or is a
habitually reckless or negligent driver of a motor vehicle.

5.  Is
medically, psychologically or physically incapable of operating a motor vehicle
and, based on law enforcement, medical or other department information, the
continued operation of a motor vehicle by the licensee would endanger the
public health, safety and welfare.

6.  Has
committed or permitted an act involving an unlawful or fraudulent use of the
license.

7.  Has
committed an offense in another jurisdiction that if committed in this state is
grounds for suspension or revocation.

8.  Has
been convicted of a violation of section 28‑1381 or 28‑1382.

9.  Has
been convicted of a violation of section 28‑1464.

B.  On
receipt of satisfactory evidence of a violation of a driver license
restriction, the department may suspend or revoke the driver license.

C.  On
suspending or revoking the license of a person or requiring a licensee to
attend and successfully complete approved traffic survival school educational
sessions designed to improve the safety and habits of drivers pursuant to this
section, the department shall notify the licensee in writing immediately.

D.  On
the receipt of the person's request for a hearing, the department shall set the
hearing within sixty days.  The department may hold the hearing in
person, by telephone or by videoconference.  If the department holds the
hearing in person, the department shall hold the hearing in the county where
the licensee resides unless the law enforcement agency issuing the citation or
affidavit that authorizes the suspension or revocation requests at the time of
issuance that the hearing be held in the county where the violation allegedly
occurred.

E.  If
a hearing is held, the department or its duly authorized agent may administer
oaths, may issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses and the production
of relevant books and papers and may require a reexamination of the licensee.

F.  At
the hearing, the department shall either rescind its order of suspension or its
order requiring the licensee to attend and successfully complete approved
traffic survival school educational sessions or, if good cause exists, the
department may uphold or extend the order, revoke the license or make any order
that is within its discretionary power under this section and that is in the
interest of public safety.

G.  If
a licensee receives notice requiring the licensee to attend and successfully
complete approved traffic survival school educational sessions and the
department receives information of noncompliance with this order, the
department may amend the order to suspend or revoke the license.

H.  A
person whose driver license is suspended or revoked as provided in subsection
A, paragraph 5 of this section may submit a written request to the department
for an administrative hearing.  The person shall submit the request
for a hearing within fifteen days after the department provides the person with
notice of suspension or revocation.  On receipt of a proper request
for a hearing, the department shall provide the person with an opportunity for
a hearing in the county where the person resides within thirty days after the department
receives the request.  The request for a hearing does not stay a
summary suspension issued by the department.

I.  The
department shall remove a suspension from a record if the person has completed
all requirements imposed under this title or by a court in this state except
for payment of reinstatement fees as prescribed by section 28‑3002.  The
person shall pay the appropriate reinstatement fees that is required under
section 28‑3002 when conducting a transaction with the department. END_STATUTE

Sec. 10.  Section 28-3318, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE28-3318.  Service
of notice; definitions

A.  The
department shall provide written, electronic or
digital notice
to a person possessing a driver license, to an unlicensed driver or to a
nonresident driver of the following:

1.  A
suspension, revocation, cancellation, disqualification or certified ignition
interlock device limitation of the license or privilege to operate a motor
vehicle.

2.  Required
attendance at training and education sessions.

B.  The
department may include additional information in the written, electronic or digital notice developed in consultation
with the director of the department of public safety as prescribed in section
28‑1462 regarding certified ignition interlock devices.

C.  The
department shall send the notice by mail or electronically or digitally to the address provided to the
department on the licensee's application or provided to the department pursuant
to section 28‑448.  If an address has not been provided to the
department as provided in this subsection, the department shall send the notice
to any address known to the department, including the address listed on a
traffic citation received by the department.

D.  Service
of the notice provided by this section is complete on mailing.  The
department shall provide further service of notice only if the department is
notified of a change of address pursuant to section 28‑448.

E.  Compliance
with the mailing provisions of this section constitutes notice of the
suspension, revocation, cancellation, disqualification or certified ignition
interlock device limitation for purposes of prosecution under section 28‑1383,
28‑3473
or 28‑1464 or 28‑3473.  The state is not
required to prove actual receipt of the notice or actual knowledge of the
suspension, revocation, cancellation, disqualification or certified ignition
interlock device limitation.

F.  Compliance
with the mailing provisions of this section constitutes notice of suspension or
restriction for the purposes of suspension or restriction under section 28‑3320.  The
state is not required to prove actual receipt of the notice or actual knowledge
of the suspension or restriction.

G.  For
the purposes of this section: , 

1.  "Certified ignition interlock
device" has the same meaning prescribed in section 28‑1301.

2.  "Mail"
or "mailing" means delivery by first class or certified mail or
through a department electronic or digital system. END_STATUTE

Sec. 11.  Section 28-4133, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE28-4133.  Insurance
identification cards; documentary evidence; exception

A.  An
authorized insurer shall issue at least two motor vehicle insurance
identification cards for a motor vehicle or automobile liability policy that
meets the requirements of section 28‑4009 or section 28‑4033,
subsection A, paragraph 2, subdivision (c).

B.  The
card shall state that:

1.  A
person is required to possess evidence of financial responsibility within the
motor vehicle.

2.  The
card meets the requirement or an image of the card that is displayed on a
wireless communication device meets the requirement.

3.  The
card or an image of the card that is displayed on a wireless communication
device is satisfactory evidence if the person is asked by the department of
transportation to verify financial responsibility on the motor vehicle.

C.  All
documentary evidence issued by an insurer or an authorized agent of the insurer
shall indicate:

1.  The
name of the insurer as listed with the department of insurance.

2.  the
number that the department assigns to the insurer.

2.  3.  For the purpose of verifying
insurance coverage, the mailing address and telephone number of the insurer or
an authorized agent of the insurer.

3.  4.  In order to accurately verify
insurance coverage, other information as required by the department of
transportation.

4.  5.  If a binder is issued by an
authorized agent of an insurer, the name, address and telephone number of the
agent.

D.  This
section does not apply to a commercial vehicle policy that provides automatic
coverage for additional or newly acquired vehicles until the policy's
expiration date. END_STATUTE

Sec. 12.  Section 28-4147, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE28-4147.  Service
of notice; definition

A.  The department shall send written
notice to the owner or lessee of a motor vehicle registered pursuant to chapter
7 of this title of any suspension or any financial responsibility
verification.  The department shall send the notice electronically or
digitally, by
mail to the address provided to the department on the registration application
or pursuant to section 28‑448.  Service of notice is complete
on mailing.

B.  For
the purposes of this section, "mail" or "mailing" means
delivery by first class or certified mail or through a department electronic or
digital system.
END_STATUTE 

Sec. 13.  Effective date

Section
28-2356, Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended by this act, is effective from
and after August 31, 2019.

