

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Title 15, chapter 1, article 8, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 15-186.01, to read:

START_STATUTE15-186.01.  Parental
notification; immunity

A.  In
Addition to the notification requirements prescribed in section 15‑186,
each charter school governing body shall prescribe and enforce reasonable and
appropriate policies to notify a pupil's parent or guardian if any person
engages in threatening, harassing or intimidating conduct against that
pupil.  A charter school and its officials and employees are immune
from civil liability with respect to all decisions made and actions taken that
are based on good faith implementation of the requirements of this section,
except in cases of gross negligence or wanton or wilful neglect.

B.  A
person commits threatening or intimidating if the person threatens or
intimidates by word or conduct to cause physical injury to another person or
serious damage to the property of another on school grounds.  A person commits
harassment if, with intent to harass or with knowledge that the person is
harassing another person, the person anonymously or otherwise contacts,
communicates or causes a communication with another person by verbal,
electronic, mechanical, telephonic or written means in a manner that harasses
on school grounds or substantially disrupts the school environment. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 15-341, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE15-341.  General
powers and duties; immunity; delegation

A.  The
governing board shall:

1.  Prescribe
and enforce policies and procedures for the governance of the schools, not
inconsistent with law or rules prescribed by the state board of education.

2.  Exclude
from schools all books, publications, papers or audiovisual materials of a
sectarian, partisan or denominational character.  This paragraph shall not be
construed to prohibit the elective course permitted by section 15‑717.01.

3.  Manage
and control the school property within its district.

4.  Acquire
school furniture, apparatus, equipment, library books and supplies for the use
of the schools.

5.  Prescribe
the curricula and criteria for the promotion and graduation of pupils as
provided in sections 15‑701 and 15‑701.01.

6.  Furnish,
repair and insure, at full insurable value, the school property of the
district.

7.  Construct
school buildings on approval by a vote of the district electors.

8.  Make
in the name of the district conveyances of property belonging to the district
and sold by the board.

9.  Purchase
school sites when authorized by a vote of the district at an election conducted
as nearly as practicable in the same manner as the election provided in section
15‑481 and held on a date prescribed in section 15‑491, subsection
E, but such authorization shall not necessarily specify the site to be
purchased and such authorization shall not be necessary to exchange unimproved
property as provided in section 15‑342, paragraph 23.

10.  Construct,
improve and furnish buildings used for school purposes when such buildings or
premises are leased from the national park service.

11.  Purchase
school sites or construct, improve and furnish school buildings from the
proceeds of the sale of school property only on approval by a vote of the
district electors.

12.  Hold
pupils to strict account for disorderly conduct on school property.

13.  Discipline
students for disorderly conduct on the way to and from school.

14.  Except
as provided in section 15‑1224, deposit all monies received by the
district as gifts, grants and devises with the county treasurer who shall
credit the deposits as designated in the uniform system of financial records. 
If not inconsistent with the terms of the gifts, grants and devises given, any
balance remaining after expenditures for the intended purpose of the monies
have been made shall be used for reduction of school district taxes for the
budget year, except that in the case of accommodation schools the county
treasurer shall carry the balance forward for use by the county school
superintendent for accommodation schools for the budget year.

15.  Provide
that, if a parent or legal guardian chooses not to accept a decision of the
teacher as provided in section paragraph 42 of this
subsection, the parent or legal guardian may request in writing that the
governing board review the teacher's decision.  This paragraph shall not be construed to release school districts from any liability
relating to a child's promotion or retention.

16.  Provide
for adequate supervision over pupils in instructional and noninstructional
activities by certificated or noncertificated personnel.

17.  Use
school monies received from the state and county school apportionment
exclusively for payment of salaries of teachers and other employees and
contingent expenses of the district.

18.  Make
an annual report to the county school superintendent on or before October 1 in
the manner and form and on the blanks prescribed by the superintendent of
public instruction or county school superintendent.  The board shall also make
reports directly to the county school superintendent or the superintendent of
public instruction whenever required.

19.  Deposit
all monies received by school districts other than student activities monies or
monies from auxiliary operations as provided in sections 15‑1125 and 15‑1126
with the county treasurer to the credit of the school district except as
provided in paragraph 20 of this subsection and sections 15‑1223 and 15‑1224,
and the board shall expend the monies as provided by law for other school
funds.

20.  Establish
bank accounts in which the board during a month may deposit miscellaneous
monies received directly by the district.  The board shall remit monies
deposited in the bank accounts at least monthly to the county treasurer for
deposit as provided in paragraph 19 of this subsection and in accordance with
the uniform system of financial records.

21.  Prescribe
and enforce policies and procedures for disciplinary action against a teacher
who engages in conduct that is a violation of the policies of the governing
board but that is not cause for dismissal of the teacher or for revocation of
the certificate of the teacher.  Disciplinary action may include suspension
without pay for a period of time not to exceed ten school days.  Disciplinary
action shall not include suspension with pay or suspension without pay for a
period of time longer than ten school days. The procedures shall include
notice, hearing and appeal provisions for violations that are cause for
disciplinary action.  The governing board may designate a person or persons to
act on behalf of the board on these matters.

22.  Prescribe
and enforce policies and procedures for disciplinary action against an administrator
who engages in conduct that is a violation of the policies of the governing
board regarding duties of administrators but that is not cause for dismissal of
the administrator or for revocation of the certificate of the administrator. 
Disciplinary action may include suspension without pay for a period of time not
to exceed ten school days.  Disciplinary action shall not include suspension
with pay or suspension without pay for a period of time longer than ten school
days.  The procedures shall include notice, hearing and appeal
provisions for violations that are cause for disciplinary
action.  The governing board may designate a person or persons to act
on behalf of the board on these matters.  For violations that are
cause for dismissal, the provisions of notice, hearing and appeal in chapter 5,
article 3 of this title shall apply.  The filing of a timely request
for a hearing suspends the imposition of a suspension without pay or a
dismissal pending completion of the hearing.

23.  Notwithstanding
sections 13‑3108 and 13‑3120, prescribe and enforce policies and
procedures that prohibit a person from carrying or possessing a weapon on
school grounds unless the person is a peace officer or has obtained specific
authorization from the school administrator.

24.  Prescribe
and enforce policies and procedures relating to the health and safety of all
pupils participating in district sponsored
district‑sponsored practice sessions or games or other
interscholastic athletic activities, including:

(a)  The
provision of water.

(b)  Guidelines,
information and forms, developed in consultation with a statewide private
entity that supervises interscholastic activities, to inform and educate
coaches, pupils and parents of the dangers of concussions and head injuries and
the risks of continued participation in athletic activity after a concussion. 
The policies and procedures shall require that, before a pupil participates in
an athletic activity, the pupil and the pupil's parent must sign an information
form at least once each school year that states that the parent is aware of the
nature and risk of concussion.  The policies and procedures shall require that
a pupil who is suspected of sustaining a concussion in a practice session, game
or other interscholastic athletic activity be immediately removed from the
athletic activity and that the pupil's parent or guardian be
notified.  A coach from the pupil's team or an
official or a licensed health care provider may remove a pupil from play.  A
team parent may also remove the parent's own child from play.  A pupil may
return to play on the same day if a health care provider rules out a suspected
concussion at the time the pupil is removed from play.  On a subsequent day,
the pupil may return to play if the pupil has been evaluated by and received
written clearance to resume participation in athletic activity from a health
care provider who has been trained in the evaluation and management of
concussions and head injuries.  A health care provider who is a volunteer and
who provides clearance to participate in athletic activity on the day of the
suspected injury or on a subsequent day is immune from civil liability with
respect to all decisions made and actions taken that are based on good faith
implementation of the requirements of this subdivision, except in cases of
gross negligence or wanton or wilful neglect. A school district, school
district employee, team coach, official or team volunteer or a parent or
guardian of a team member is not subject to civil liability for any act,
omission or policy undertaken in good faith to comply with the requirements of
this subdivision or for a decision made or an action taken by a health care
provider.  A group or organization that uses property or facilities
owned or operated by a school district for athletic activities shall comply
with the requirements of this subdivision.  A school district and its
employees and volunteers are not subject to civil liability for any other
person or organization's failure or alleged failure to comply with the
requirements of this subdivision.  This subdivision does not apply to teams
that are based in another state and that participate in an athletic activity in
this state.  For the purposes of this subdivision, athletic activity
does not include dance, rhythmic gymnastics, competitions or exhibitions of
academic skills or knowledge or other similar forms of physical noncontact
activities, civic activities or academic activities, whether engaged in for the
purposes of competition or recreation.  For the purposes of this
subdivision, "health care provider" means a physician who is licensed
pursuant to title 32, chapter 13 or 17, an athletic trainer who is licensed
pursuant to title 32, chapter 41, a nurse practitioner who is licensed pursuant
to title 32, chapter 15, and a physician assistant who is licensed pursuant to
title 32, chapter 25.

(c)  Guidelines,
information and forms that are developed in consultation with a statewide
private entity that supervises interscholastic activities to inform and educate
coaches, pupils and parents of the dangers of heat-related illnesses, sudden
cardiac death and prescription opioid use.  Before a pupil
participates in any district‑sponsored practice session, game or other
interscholastic athletic activity, the pupil and the pupil's parent must be
provided with information at least once each school year on the risks of
heat-related illnesses, sudden cardiac death and prescription opioid addiction.

25.  Establish
an assessment, data gathering and reporting system as prescribed in chapter 7,
article 3 of this title.

26.  Provide
special education programs and related services pursuant to section 15‑764,
subsection A to all children with disabilities as defined in section 15‑761.

27.  Administer
competency tests prescribed by the state board of education for the graduation
of pupils from high school.

28.  Ensure
that insurance coverage is secured for all construction projects for purposes
of general liability, property damage and workers' compensation and secure
performance and payment bonds for all construction projects.

29.  Keep
in the personnel file of all current and former employees who provide
instruction to pupils at a school information about the employee's educational
and teaching background and experience in a particular academic content subject
area.  A school district shall inform parents and guardians of the
availability of the information and shall make the information available for
inspection on request of parents and guardians of pupils enrolled at a
school.  This paragraph shall not be construed to require any school
to release personally identifiable information in relation to any teacher or
employee, including the teacher's or employee's address, salary, social
security number or telephone number.

30.  Report
to local law enforcement agencies any suspected crime against a person or
property that is a serious offense as defined in section 13‑706 or that
involves a deadly weapon or dangerous instrument or serious physical injury and
any conduct that poses a threat of death or serious physical injury to
employees, students or anyone on the property of the school.  This paragraph
does not limit or preclude the reporting by a school district or an employee of
a school district of suspected crimes other than those required to be reported
by this paragraph.  For the purposes of this paragraph, "dangerous
instrument", "deadly weapon" and "serious physical
injury" have the same meanings prescribed in section 13‑105.

31.  In
conjunction with local law enforcement agencies and emergency response
agencies, develop an emergency response plan for each school in the school
district in accordance with minimum standards developed jointly by the
department of education and the division of emergency management within the
department of emergency and military affairs.

32.  Provide
written notice to the parents or guardians of all students enrolled in the
school district at least ten days prior to a public meeting to discuss closing
a school within the school district.  The notice shall include the
reasons for the proposed closure and the time and place of the
meeting.  The governing board shall fix a time for a public meeting
on the proposed closure no less than ten days before voting in a public meeting
to close the school.  The school district governing board shall give notice of
the time and place of the meeting.  At the time and place designated
in the notice, the school district governing board shall hear reasons for or
against closing the school.  The school district governing board is
exempt from this paragraph if it is determined by the governing board that the
school shall be closed because it poses a danger to the health or safety of the
pupils or employees of the school.  A governing board may consult
with the school facilities board for technical assistance and for information
on the impact of closing a school.  The information provided from the school
facilities board shall not require the governing board to take or not take any
action.

33.  Incorporate
instruction on Native American history into appropriate existing curricula.

34.  Prescribe
and enforce policies and procedures:

(a)  Allowing
pupils who have been diagnosed with anaphylaxis by a health care provider
licensed pursuant to title 32, chapter 13, 14, 17 or 25 or by a registered
nurse practitioner licensed and certified pursuant to title 32, chapter 15 to
carry and self-administer emergency medications, including epinephrine auto‑injectors,
while at school and at school‑sponsored activities.  The pupil's name on
the prescription label on the medication container or on the medication device
and annual written documentation from the pupil's parent or guardian to the
school that authorizes possession and self-administration is sufficient proof
that the pupil is entitled to the possession and self‑administration of
the medication.  The policies shall require a pupil who uses an epinephrine
auto‑injector while at school and at school‑sponsored activities to
notify the nurse or the designated school staff person of the use of the
medication as soon as practicable.  A school district and its employees are
immune from civil liability with respect to all decisions made and actions
taken that are based on good faith implementation of the requirements of this
subdivision, except in cases of wanton or wilful neglect.

(b)  For
the emergency administration of epinephrine auto‑injectors by a trained
employee of a school district pursuant to section 15‑157.

35.  Allow
the possession and self-administration of prescription medication for breathing
disorders in handheld inhaler devices by pupils who have been prescribed that
medication by a health care professional licensed pursuant to title
32.  The pupil's name on the prescription label on the medication
container or on the handheld inhaler device and annual written documentation
from the pupil's parent or guardian to the school that authorizes possession
and self-administration shall be sufficient proof that the pupil is entitled to
the possession and self‑administration of the medication.  A
school district and its employees are immune from civil liability with respect
to all decisions made and actions taken that are based on a good faith
implementation of the requirements of this paragraph.

36.  Prescribe
and enforce policies and procedures to prohibit pupils from harassing,
intimidating and bullying other pupils on school grounds, on school property,
on school buses, at school bus stops, at school‑sponsored events and
activities and through the use of electronic technology or electronic communication
on school computers, networks, forums and mailing lists that include the
following components:

(a)  A
procedure for pupils, parents and school district employees to confidentially
report to school officials incidents of harassment, intimidation or
bullying.  The school shall make available written forms designed to
provide a full and detailed description of the incident and any other relevant
information about the incident.

(b)  A
requirement that school district employees report in writing suspected
incidents of harassment, intimidation or bullying to the appropriate school
official and a description of appropriate disciplinary procedures for employees
who fail to report suspected incidents that are known to the employee.

(c)  A
requirement that, at the beginning of each school year, school officials
provide all pupils with a written copy of the rights, protections and support
services available to a pupil who is an alleged victim of an incident reported
pursuant to this paragraph.

(d)  If
an incident is reported pursuant to this paragraph, a requirement that school
officials provide a pupil who is an alleged victim of the incident with a
written copy of the rights, protections and support services available to that
pupil.

(e)  A
formal process for the documentation of reported incidents of harassment,
intimidation or bullying and for the confidentiality, maintenance and
disposition of this documentation.  School districts shall maintain
documentation of all incidents reported pursuant to this paragraph for at least
six years.  The school shall not use that documentation to impose disciplinary
action unless the appropriate school official has investigated and determined
that the reported incidents of harassment, intimidation or bullying occurred.  If
a school provides documentation of reported incidents to persons other than
school officials or law enforcement, all individually identifiable information
shall be redacted.

(f)  A
formal process for the investigation by the appropriate school officials of
suspected incidents of harassment, intimidation or bullying, including
procedures for notifying the alleged victim on completion and
disposition of the investigation and the alleged victim's
parent or guardian when a school official or employee becomes aware of the
suspected incident of harassment, intimidation or bullying.

(g)  Disciplinary
procedures for pupils who have admitted or been found to have committed
incidents of harassment, intimidation or bullying.

(h)  A
procedure that sets forth consequences for submitting false reports of
incidents of harassment, intimidation or bullying. 

(i)  Procedures
designed to protect the health and safety of pupils who are physically harmed
as the result of incidents of harassment, intimidation and bullying, including,
if appropriate, procedures to contact emergency medical services or law
enforcement agencies, or both.

(j)  Definitions
of harassment, intimidation and bullying.

37.  Prescribe
and enforce policies and procedures regarding changing or adopting attendance
boundaries that include the following components:

(a)  A
procedure for holding public meetings to discuss attendance boundary changes or
adoptions that allows public comments. 

(b)  A
procedure to notify the parents or guardians of the students affected.

(c)  A
procedure to notify the residents of the households affected by the attendance
boundary changes.

(d)  A
process for placing public meeting notices and proposed maps on the school
district's website for public review, if the school district maintains a
website.

(e)  A
formal process for presenting the attendance boundaries of the affected area in
public meetings that allows public comments.

(f)  A
formal process for notifying the residents and parents or guardians of the
affected area as to the decision of the governing board on the school
district's website, if the school district maintains a website.

(g)  A
formal process for updating attendance boundaries on the school district's
website within ninety days of an adopted boundary change.  The school
district shall send a direct link to the school district's attendance
boundaries website to the department of real estate.

38.  If
the state board of education determines that the school district has committed
an overexpenditure as defined in section 15‑107, provide a copy of the
fiscal management report submitted pursuant to section 15‑107, subsection
H on its website and make copies available to the public on
request.  The school district shall comply with a request within five
business days after receipt.

39.  Ensure
that the contract for the superintendent is structured in a manner in which up
to twenty percent of the total annual salary included for the superintendent in
the contract is classified as performance pay.  This paragraph shall not be construed
to require school districts to increase total compensation for
superintendents.  Unless the school district governing board votes to
implement an alternative procedure at a public meeting called for this purpose,
the performance pay portion of the superintendent's total annual compensation
shall be determined as follows:

(a)  Twenty‑five
percent of the performance pay shall be determined based on the percentage of
academic gain determined by the department of education of pupils who are
enrolled in the school district compared to the academic gain achieved by the
highest ranking of the fifty largest school districts in this
state.  For the purposes of this subdivision, the department of
education shall determine academic gain by the academic growth achieved by each
pupil who has been enrolled at the same school in a school district for at
least five consecutive months measured against that pupil's academic results in
the 2008‑2009 school year.  For the purposes of this
subdivision, of the fifty largest school districts in this state, the school
district with pupils who demonstrate the highest statewide percentage of
overall academic gain measured against academic results for the 2008‑2009
school year shall be assigned a score of 100 and the school district with
pupils who demonstrate the lowest statewide percentage of overall academic gain
measured against academic results for the 2008‑2009 school year shall be
assigned a score of 0.

(b)  Twenty‑five
percent of the performance pay shall be determined by the percentage of parents
of pupils who are enrolled at the school district who assign a letter grade of
"A" to the school on a survey of parental satisfaction with the
school district.  The parental satisfaction survey shall be administered
and scored by an independent entity that is selected by the governing board and
that demonstrates sufficient expertise and experience to accurately measure the
results of the survey.  The parental satisfaction survey shall use standard
random sampling procedures and provide anonymity and confidentiality to each
parent who participates in the survey.  The letter grade scale used
on the parental satisfaction survey shall direct parents to assign one of the
following letter grades:

(i)  A
letter grade of "A" if the school district is excellent.

(ii)  A
letter grade of "B" if the school district is above average.

(iii)  A
letter grade of "C" if the school district is average.

(iv)  A
letter grade of "D" if the school district is below average.

(v)  A
letter grade of "F" if the school district is a failure.

(c)  Twenty‑five
percent of the performance pay shall be determined by the percentage of
teachers who are employed at the school district and who assign a letter grade
of "A" to the school on a survey of teacher satisfaction with the
school.  The teacher satisfaction survey shall be administered and
scored by an independent entity that is selected by the governing board and
that demonstrates sufficient expertise and experience to accurately measure the
results of the survey.  The teacher satisfaction survey shall use
standard random sampling procedures and provide anonymity and confidentiality
to each teacher who participates in the survey.  The letter grade scale used on
the teacher satisfaction survey shall direct teachers to assign one of the
following letter grades:

(i)  A
letter grade of "A" if the school district is excellent.

(ii)  A
letter grade of "B" if the school district is above average.

(iii)  A
letter grade of "C" if the school district is average.

(iv)  A
letter grade of "D" if the school district is below average.

(v)  A
letter grade of "F" if the school district is a failure.

(d)  Twenty‑five
percent of the performance pay shall be determined by other criteria selected
by the governing board.

40.  Maintain
and store permanent public records of the school district as required by law. 
Notwithstanding section 39‑101, the standards adopted by the Arizona
state library, archives and public records for the maintenance and storage of
school district public records shall allow school districts to elect to satisfy
the requirements of this paragraph by maintaining and storing these records
either on paper or in an electronic format, or a combination of a paper and
electronic format.

41.  Adopt
in a public meeting and implement by school year 2013‑2014
policies for principal evaluations.  Before the adoption of principal
evaluation policies, the school district governing board shall provide
opportunities for public discussion on the proposed policies.  The policies
shall describe:

(a)  The
principal evaluation instrument, including the four performance classifications
adopted by the governing board pursuant to section 15‑203, subsection A,
paragraph 38.

(b)  Alignment
of professional development opportunities to the principal evaluations.

(c)  Incentives
for principals in one of the two highest performance classifications pursuant
to section 15‑203, subsection A, paragraph 38, which may include:

(i)  Multiyear
contracts pursuant to section 15‑503.

(ii)  Incentives
to work at schools that are assigned a letter grade of D or F pursuant to
section 15‑241.

(d)  Transfer
and contract processes for principals designated in the lowest performance
classification pursuant to section 15‑203, subsection A, paragraph 38.

42.  Prescribe
and enforce policies and procedures that define the duties of principals and
teachers.  These policies and procedures shall authorize teachers to
take and maintain daily classroom attendance, make the decision to promote or
retain a pupil in a grade in common school or to pass or fail a pupil in a
course in high school, subject to review by the governing board in the manner
provided in section 15‑342, paragraph 11.

43.  Prescribe
and enforce policies and procedures for the emergency administration by an employee
of a school district pursuant to section 36‑2267 of naloxone
hydrochloride or any other opioid antagonist approved by the United States food
and drug administration.

44.  In
addition to the notification requirements prescribed in paragraph 36 of this
subsection, prescribe and enforce reasonable and appropriate policies to notify
a pupil's parent or guardian if any person engages in threatening, harassing or
intimidating conduct against that pupil.  A school district and its officials
and employees are immune from civil liability with respect to all decisions
made and actions taken that are based on good faith implementation of the
requirements of this paragraph, except in cases of gross negligence or wanton
or wilful neglect.  a person commits threatening or intimidating if
the person threatens or intimidates by word or conduct to cause physical injury
to another person or serious damage to the property of another on school
grounds.  a person commits harassment if, with intent to harass or with knowledge
that the person is harassing another person, the person anonymously or
otherwise contacts, communicates or causes a communication with another person
by verbal, electronic, mechanical, telephonic or written means in a manner that
harasses on school grounds or substantially disrupts the school environment.

B.  Notwithstanding
subsection A, paragraphs 7, 9 and 11 of this section, the county school
superintendent may construct, improve and furnish school buildings or purchase
or sell school sites in the conduct of an accommodation school.

C.  If
any school district acquires real or personal property, whether by purchase,
exchange, condemnation, gift or otherwise, the governing board shall pay to the
county treasurer any taxes on the property that were unpaid as of the date of
acquisition, including penalties and interest.  The lien for unpaid delinquent
taxes, penalties and interest on property acquired by a school district:

1.  Is
not abated, extinguished, discharged or merged in the title to the property.

2.  Is
enforceable in the same manner as other delinquent tax liens.

D.  The
governing board may not locate a school on property that is less than one‑fourth
mile from agricultural land regulated pursuant to section 3‑365, except
that the owner of the agricultural land may agree to comply with the buffer
zone requirements of section 3‑365.  If the owner agrees in
writing to comply with the buffer zone requirements and records the agreement
in the office of the county recorder as a restrictive covenant running with the
title to the land, the school district may locate a school within the affected
buffer zone.  The agreement may include any stipulations regarding
the school, including conditions for future expansion of the school and changes
in the operational status of the school that will result in a breach of the
agreement. 

E.  A
school district, its governing board members, its school council members and
its employees are immune from civil liability for the consequences of adoption
and implementation of policies and procedures pursuant to subsection A of this
section and section 15‑342.  This waiver does not apply if the school
district, its governing board members, its school council members or its
employees are guilty of gross negligence or intentional misconduct.

F.  A
governing board may delegate in writing to a superintendent, principal or head
teacher the authority to prescribe procedures that are consistent with the
governing board's policies.

G.  Notwithstanding
any other provision of this title, a school district governing board shall not
take any action that would result in a reduction of pupil square footage unless
the governing board notifies the school facilities board established by section
15‑2001 of the proposed action and receives written approval from the
school facilities board to take the action.  A reduction includes an
increase in administrative space that results in a reduction of pupil square
footage or sale of school sites or buildings, or both.  A reduction includes a
reconfiguration of grades that results in a reduction of pupil square footage
of any grade level.  This subsection does not apply to temporary
reconfiguration of grades to accommodate new school construction if the
temporary reconfiguration does not exceed one year.  The sale of
equipment that results in a reduction that falls below the equipment
requirements prescribed in section 15‑2011, subsection B is subject to
commensurate withholding of school district district additional assistance
monies pursuant to the direction of the school facilities
board.  Except as provided in section 15‑342, paragraph 10,
proceeds from the sale of school sites, buildings or other equipment shall be
deposited in the school plant fund as provided in section 15‑1102.

H.  Subsections
C through G of this section apply to a county board of supervisors and a county
school superintendent when operating and administering an accommodation school.
END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Concussion management
pilot program for physical therapists; reports; delayed repeal

A.  The
department of education, in cooperation with a statewide organization that
governs interscholastic activities, shall:

1.  Conduct
a two-year concussion management pilot program during the 2018‑2019 and
2019‑2020 school years for physical therapists who have been trained in
the evaluation and management of concussions and head injuries. 
Notwithstanding section 15‑341, Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended by
this act, during the 2018‑2019 and 2019‑2020 school years, a
physical therapist who is licensed pursuant to title 32, chapter 19, Arizona
Revised Statutes, may remove from an athletic activity a pupil who the physical
therapist suspects has sustained a concussion.  A physical therapist may assess
a pupil with a suspected concussion, make return‑to‑play decisions
on the same day and provide clearance to resume participation in athletic
activity on a subsequent day.

2.  On
or before December 31, 2019, submit an initial report to the governor, the president
of the senate and the speaker of the house of representatives that summarizes
the department's findings and conclusions about the number of physical
therapists who participated in the first year of the pilot program and the
impact and effectiveness of the first year of the pilot program.  On or before
December 31, 2020, the department shall submit a final report to the governor,
the president of the senate and the speaker of the house of representatives
that summarizes the department's findings and conclusions regarding the pilot
program.  The department shall provide a copy of the reports to the
secretary of state.

B.  The
department of education may adopt policies and procedures to carry out the
purposes of the pilot program.

C.  This
section is repealed from and after March 31, 2021.

