

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 48-2607, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE48-2607.  District
divisions; number of directors; exception

A.  When
the boundaries of the proposed district are defined and established, the board
of supervisors shall make an order dividing the district into three or five
divisions as nearly equal in size as practicable, which shall be numbered
consecutively.  One director, who shall be an elector and a resident freeholder
of the division, shall be elected as provided in this article by each division.

B.  When
requested in the petition, three directors, who shall be resident electors and
freeholders of the district, shall be elected at large by the qualified
electors of the district.

C.  This
section does not apply in the case of the division of a flood protection district as
provided by section 48‑2816. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Title 48, chapter 18, article 10, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 48-2816, to read:

START_STATUTE48-2816.  Flood
protection districts; directors; qualification of electors

A.  Notwithstanding
section 48-2682, a district formed pursuant to this article shall be governed
by a board of directors elected at large and consisting of either three or five
directors.  Any person who is eligible to vote in an election in the
district as prescribed by subsection B of this section is eligible to serve as
a director of the district.

B.  To
be eligible to vote in a district election, a person must be an owner of real
property that is located within the boundaries of the district and on which all
taxes have been paid as shown by the county tax roll immediately preceding the
date of the election.  In addition, the following apply:

1.  For
the purpose of organizing a new flood protection district after the effective
date of this section, the qualifications of electors are the same as provided
by this section.

2.  The
administrator or executor of the estate of a deceased person, and the guardian
of a minor or incompetent person who is appointed and qualified under the laws
of this state, may register and cast the vote of the estate or person
represented by the administrator or executor.

3.  The
officer or agent of a corporation in whose name title to property in the
district on which it has paid taxes as shown on the most recent tax roll and
who is designated and authorized by a resolution of the corporate board of
directors is eligible to vote and may register and cast the vote of the
corporation.

4.  The
general partner of a partnership in whose name title to property in the
district on which it has paid taxes as shown on the most recent tax roll and
who is designated and authorized in writing by all of the general partners is
eligible to vote and may register and cast the vote of the partnership.

5.  The
trustee of a trust, or if there is more than one trustee, a trustee who is
designated and authorized in writing by all of the trustees, in whose name
title to property in the district on which it has paid taxes as shown on the
most recent tax roll is eligible to vote and may register and cast the vote of the
trust.

6.  The
member or manager of a limited liability company who is designated and
authorized in writing by the controlling members or managers of the limited
liability company in whose name title to property in the district on which it
has paid taxes as shown on the most recent tax roll is eligible to vote and may
register and cast the vote of the limited liability company. END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Emergency

This act is
an emergency measure that is necessary to preserve the public peace, health or
safety and is operative immediately as provided by law.

