

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 23-750, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE23-750.  Special
provisions for nonprofit organizations and state and local governments

A.  The provisions of This section apply applies to:

1.  Any
nonprofit organization described in section 23-617, paragraph 10 of section 23‑617, which that but for the provisions of section 23‑613, subsection
A, paragraph 2, subdivision (c) would not be subject to this chapter, or which that is not mandatorily subject to
this chapter because of insufficient employees but which that has voluntarily elected to become
subject to this chapter.

2.  This
state, or a political subdivision thereof of this state, or any instrumentality, agency
or board of any one or more of the foregoing or any instrumentality of any of
the foregoing and one or more other states or political subdivisions.

B.  Benefits
paid to employees of employing units to which this section applies shall be
financed in
accordance with the provisions of pursuant to this subsection.  as follows:

1.  Any
employing unit to which this section applies:

(a)  Which That is or becomes subject to this
chapter on January 1, 1972, may elect to become liable for payments in lieu of
contributions for a period of not less than at
least three
consecutive taxable years beginning with January 1, 1972, provided it files
with the department a written notice of its election not later than sixty days
after written notice that such the election may be made is first
given to the employing unit by the department.

(b)  Which That becomes subject to this chapter
after January 1, 1972, may elect to become liable for payments in lieu of
contributions for a period of not less than at
least three
consecutive taxable years by filing a written notice of its election with the
department not later than thirty days immediately following the date of the
determination of
such subjectivity
that the employing unit is subject to this chapter.

(c)  Which That makes an election in accordance
with subdivision (a) or (b) of this paragraph shall continue to be liable for
payments in lieu of contributions until it files with the department a written
notice terminating its election not later than thirty days prior to before the beginning of the taxable year
for which such termination shall first be effective.

(d)  Which That has been paying contributions
under this chapter subsequent
to after January 1, 1972, for a period of not less than at least three consecutive taxable years
may elect to become liable for payments in lieu of contributions for a period
of not
less than at least three consecutive taxable years by
filing a written notice of its election with the department not later than
thirty days prior
to before the beginning of the taxable year
for which such the election shall first be effective.

2.  The
department may for good cause extend the period within which a notice of
election or a notice of termination must be filed.

3.  The
department shall notify the employing unit of any determination made of its
status as an employer and of the effective date of any election or termination
of such an election made in accordance with
this subsection.  Such The determination shall be subject to reconsideration,
petition for hearing,  and judicial review in accordance
with the
provisions of
section 23‑724.

4.  An
employing unit shall pay to the department for the fund an amount equal to the
amount of regular benefits and of one‑half of the extended benefits paid which that were based upon on wages paid during the employing
unit's period of election to make payments in lieu of contributions, except
that a governmental entity shall pay to the department for the fund an amount
equal to the total amount of extended benefits paid for weeks of unemployment beginning on or
after January 1, 1979, which
that are based upon on wages paid by the governmental
entity during its election to make payments in lieu of
contributions.  The
provisions of
Sections 23‑727, 23‑773 and 23‑777, insofar as they apply to
noncharging an employer's account for benefit payments, do not apply to
benefits paid which that were based upon on wages paid during the employing
unit's period of election to make payments in lieu of contributions.

C.  As
soon as practicable after the end of each calendar quarter the department shall
determine the amount of payments in lieu of contributions due from each
employing unit and shall bill each employing unit for the amount
due.  If payment is not made on or before the date due and payable as
prescribed by the department, the whole or part thereafter remaining unpaid
shall bear interest at the rate of one per cent percent per month or fraction thereof,
from and after the due date until payment is received by the
department.  The amount of payments due hereunder but not paid may be
collected by the department, together with interest and penalties, if any, in
the same manner and subject to the same conditions as contributions due from
other employers.  The amount due specified in any bill from the
department shall be conclusive and binding on the employing unit unless not
later than fifteen days after the bill was mailed to its last known address,
the employing unit files an application for redetermination.  A
redetermination made under this subsection shall be subject to petition for
hearing and judicial review in accordance with the provisions of section 23‑724.

D.  Two
or more employing units that have become liable for payments in lieu of
contributions may file a joint application to the department for the
establishment of a group account for the purpose of sharing the cost of
benefits paid that are attributable to service in the employ of such the employing units.  Each
application shall identify and authorize a group representative to act as the
group's agent for the purposes of this subsection.  Upon On approval of the application, the
department shall establish a group account for such the employing units effective as of
the beginning of the calendar quarter in which the application is received and
shall notify the group's representative of the effective date of the
account.  The account shall remain in effect for not less than at least three years and thereafter until
terminated at the discretion of the department or upon on application by the
group.  Upon On establishment of the account,
each member of the group shall be liable for payments in lieu of contributions
with respect to each calendar quarter in the amount that bears the same ratio
to the total benefits paid in such
that quarter that are attributable to
service performed in the employ of all members of the group as the total wages
paid for service in employment by such
the member in such that quarter bear to the total wages
paid during such quarter for service performed in the employ of all members of
the group.  The department shall prescribe such regulations as it deems necessary
with respect to applications for establishment, maintenance, and termination of
group accounts that are authorized by this subsection, for addition of new
members to, and withdrawal of active members from, such accounts, and for the
determination of the amounts that are payable under this subsection by members
of the group and the time and manner of such payments.

E.  Benefits
are payable on the basis of employment to which this section applies, in the
same amount, on the same terms, 
and subject to the same conditions as benefits payable on the basis of other
employment subject to this chapter, except that notwithstanding the provisions of sections 23‑779 and 23‑780:

1.  Benefits
based on service in an instructional, research,  or principal administrative
capacity for an educational institution shall not be paid to an individual for
any week of unemployment which that begins during the period between
two successive academic years, or during a similar period between two regular
terms, whether or not successive, or during a period of paid sabbatical leave
provided for in the individual's contract, if the individual performs such the services in the first of such the academic years or terms and if
there is a contract or a reasonable assurance that such the individual will perform services
in any such capacity for any educational institution in the second of such the academic years or terms.

2.  Benefits
based on service in any other capacity for an educational institution shall not
be paid to an individual for any week of unemployment which that begins during a period between
two successive academic years or terms if the individual performs such the services in the first of such
academic years or terms and if there is a reasonable assurance that such the individual will perform such the services in the second of such the academic years or terms, except
that if benefits are denied to any individual under this paragraph and that
individual was not offered an opportunity to perform such the services for the educational
institution for the second of such
the academic years or terms, the
individual is entitled to a retroactive payment of benefits for each week for
which the individual filed a timely claim for benefits and for which benefits
were denied solely by reason of this paragraph.

3.  Benefits
based on services described in paragraph 1 or 2 of this subsection shall not be
paid to an individual for any week of unemployment which that begins during an established and
customary vacation period or holiday recess if the individual performs such services in the period
immediately before such the vacation period or holiday recess
and if there is a reasonable assurance that such the individual will perform such  the services in the period immediately
following such vacation period or holiday recess.

4.  With
respect to any services described in paragraph 1 or 2 of this subsection,
benefits are not payable on the basis of services in any capacity specified in
paragraph 1, 2 or 3 of this subsection to any individual who performed such these services in an educational
institution while in the employ of an educational service agency.  For
the purposes of this paragraph, "educational service agency" means a
governmental agency or governmental entity which that is established and operated
exclusively for the purpose of providing such these services to one or more
educational institutions.

5.  With
respect to services described in paragraph 1, 2 or 3 of this subsection,
benefits are not payable on the basis of services specified in paragraph 1, 2
or 3 of this subsection to any individual who performed these services while in
the employ of an entity that provides these services to or on behalf of an
educational institution.

6.  If
an individual provides services to more than one educational employer described
in paragraph 1, 2 or 3 of this subsection, benefits are not payable on the
basis of services provided to an educational employer for which there is a
contract or reasonable assurance for determining eligibility for benefits
between or within terms, but benefits are payable on the basis of services
provided to an employer for which there is no contract or reasonable assurance.

F.  In
determining contribution rates assigned to employers under this chapter, the
payrolls of employing units liable for payments in lieu of contributions shall
not be included in computing the contribution rates to be assigned to employers
under this chapter.  The payments in lieu of contributions made by such these employing units shall be included
in the total assets of the fund in the same manner as contributions paid by
other employers.

G.  Except
as inconsistent with the
provisions of
this section, the
provisions of
this chapter and regulations of the department shall apply to any matter
arising pursuant to this section. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 23-787, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE23-787.  Repayment
of and deductions for benefits obtained by claimants not entitled to benefits;
collection; interest

A.  A
person who receives any amount as benefits under this chapter to which the
person is not entitled is liable to repay the overpaid amount to the
department.  The department may deduct all or a portion of the
overpayment from future benefits payable to the person under this chapter.

B.  If
benefits to which a person is not entitled are received by reason of fraud
committed by the person as determined by the department, the department shall
assess a penalty on the person equal to fifteen percent of the amount of the
erroneous payment and the person is not eligible to receive any benefits under
this chapter until the total amount of the overpayment and all penalties and
interest have been recovered, waived or otherwise satisfied in
compliance with a civil judgment.  For the purposes of this section only, any interest
on a fraud overpayment that has been waived under subsection G of this section
shall be treated as though it was recovered.  Fraud overpayments and penalties
may not be waived.  The
department shall immediately deposit all assessments paid pursuant to this
subsection in the unemployment compensation fund established by section 23‑701.

C.  If
benefits to which a person is not entitled are received without any fault on
the person's part and if repayment or deduction from future benefits would be
against equity and good conscience, the department may waive all or a portion
of the amount overpaid.

D.  If
benefits to which a person is not entitled are received without any fault on
the person's part, deductions made by the department pursuant to subsection A
of this section from benefits payable to an individual for any week shall not
exceed twenty‑five percent of the individual's weekly benefit amount
unless required by federal law, except that the amount recouped from benefits
payable may be fifty percent of the weekly benefit amount if the individual has
previously received benefits but has not received benefits for at least twelve
consecutive months before the most recent receipt of benefits and there has
been no reasonable attempt to repay the indebtedness during that
period.  The fifty percent recoupment rate may not be put in effect
before one year after the establishment of the overpayment.

E.  The
department shall adopt rules to implement subsection D of this section.

F.  The
attorney general or the appropriate county attorney may institute appropriate
court proceedings to recover in the name of the department any amount for which
a person is liable to the department. 

G.  Interest
on all benefit overpayment debts, including those reduced to judgment, shall
accrue at ten percent a year.  The department may waive a portion of
any accrued interest on a benefit overpayment debt for good cause
shown.  For benefit overpayment debts classified as fraud, the amount
of interest waived may not exceed twenty‑five percent.

H.  The
department may not collect an overpayment amount or interest amount that has
been waived pursuant to subsection C or G of this section, respectively.

I.  This
section does not prohibit the department from accepting voluntary payments. END_STATUTE

