

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 41-1491.10, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-1491.10.  Reports;
studies

A.  The
attorney general shall publish annually a written report recommending
legislative or other action to carry out the purposes of this
article.  This report shall contain, for the preceding fiscal year,
the following information:

1.  The
number of complaints initiated by the attorney general.

2.  The
number of complaints filed with the attorney general by aggrieved persons.

3.  The
number of complaints dismissed by the attorney general.

4.  The
number of complaints that resulted in conciliation agreements.

5.  The
number of complaints for which the attorney general found reasonable cause that
a discriminatory housing practice occurred or was about to occur.

6.  The
number of civil actions filed by the attorney general pursuant to section 41‑1491.34.

7.  A
description of the results of the regulatory sandbox program established
pursuant to chapter 55 of this title.

B.  The
report shall include a description of the relief awarded in civil actions and,
without attribution, benefits to complainants agreed to in conciliation
agreements.  The report shall also include the number of instances in
the preceding fiscal year, and the reasons therefor, but without attribution to
parties, the number of investigations that were not completed within the time
periods provided by section 41‑1491.24, subsection B or a determination
made pursuant to section 41‑1491.29, subsection B.

C.  The
attorney general may make studies relating to the nature and extent of
discriminatory housing practices in this state. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Title 41, Arizona Revised Statutes, is
amended by adding chapter 55, to read:

CHAPTER
55

REGULATORY
SANDBOX PROGRAM

ARTICLE
1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS

START_STATUTE41-5601.  Definitions

In
this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:

1.  "Applicable
agency" means a department or agency of this state established by law to
regulate certain types of business activity in this state and persons engaged
in such business, including the issuance of licenses or other types of
authorization, that the attorney general determines would regulate a sandbox
participant if the person was not a regulatory sandbox participant.

2.  "Consumer"
means a person that purchases or otherwise enters into a transaction or
agreement to receive an innovative financial product or service that is being
tested by a sandbox participant.

3.  "Financial
product or service" means a product or service that requires licensure
under title 6 or title 44, chapter 2.1 or 13 or a product or service that
includes a business model, delivery mechanism or element that may otherwise
require a license or other authorization to act as a financial institution or
enterprise or other entity that is regulated by title 6 or title 44, chapter
2.1 or 13.

4.  "Innovation"
means the use or incorporation of new or emerging technology or the
reimagination of uses for existing technology to address a problem, provide a
benefit or otherwise offer a product, service, business model or delivery
mechanism that is not known by the attorney general to have a comparable
widespread offering in this state.

5.  "Innovative
financial product or service" means a financial product or service that
includes an innovation.

6.  "Regulatory
sandbox" means the program established by this chapter that allows a
person to temporarily test innovative financial products or services on a
limited basis without otherwise being licensed or authorized to act under the
laws of this state.

7.  "Sandbox
participant" means a person whose application to participate in the
regulatory sandbox is approved pursuant to this chapter.

8.  "Test"
means to provide products and services as allowed by this chapter.
END_STATUTE

START_STATUTE41-5602.  Program
purpose

The
attorney general shall establish a regulatory sandbox program in consultation
with applicable agencies of this state to enable a person to obtain limited access
to the market in this state to test innovative financial products or services
without obtaining a license or other authorization that otherwise might be
required. END_STATUTE

START_STATUTE41-5603.  Application
process and requirements; fee

A.  Any
person may apply to enter the regulatory sandbox to test an innovation.

B.  The
attorney general must accept and review each application for entry into the
regulatory sandbox on a rolling basis.

C.  An
application must demonstrate that an applicant both:

1.  Is
an entity or individual that is subject to the jurisdiction of the attorney
general through incorporation, residency, presence agreement or otherwise.

2.  Has
established a location, whether physical or virtual, that is adequately
accessible to the attorney general, from which testing will be developed and
performed and where all required records, documents and data will be
maintained.

D.  Persons
that already possess a license or other authorization under state laws that
regulate a financial product or service must file an application with the
attorney general to test innovative financial products or services within the
regulatory sandbox.

E.  Applications
must contain sufficient information to demonstrate that an applicant has an
adequate understanding of the innovation and a sufficient plan to test, monitor
and assess the innovation while ensuring consumers are protected from a test's
failure.

F.  Applications
must contain the information required by a form that is developed and made
publicly available by the attorney general.  The information required by the
form may include:

1.  Relevant
personal and contact information for the applicant, including full legal names,
addresses, telephone numbers, e-mail addresses, website addresses and other
information that the attorney general deems necessary.

2.  Disclosure
of any criminal convictions of the applicant or key personnel, if any.

3.  A
description of the innovation desired to be tested, including statements
regarding all of the following: 

(a)  How an innovation is
subject to regulation outside of the regulatory sandbox.

(b)  How the innovation
would benefit consumers.

(c)  How the innovation is
different from other products or services available in this state.

(d)  What risks will
confront consumers that use or purchase the innovative financial product or
service.

(e)  How entering the
regulatory sandbox would enable a successful test of the innovation.

(f)  A description of the
proposed testing plan, including estimated time periods for market entry,
market exit and the pursuit of necessary licensure or authorization.

(g)  How the applicant
will wind down the test and protect consumers if the test fails.

G.  The
attorney general shall collect an application fee in an amount to be determined
by the attorney general.  The attorney general shall deposit,
pursuant to sections 35‑146 and 35‑147, all fees collected pursuant
to this subsection in the consumer protection‑consumer fraud revolving
fund established by section 44‑1531.01.

H.  A
person shall file a separate application for each innovation sought to be
tested.

I.  After
the information required by subsection F of this section is submitted, the
attorney general may seek additional information that it deems
necessary.  Not later than ninety days after an application is
initially submitted, the attorney general shall notify the applicant as to
whether the application is approved for entry into the regulatory sandbox. The
attorney general and an applicant may mutually agree to extend the time period
for the attorney general to determine whether an application is approved for
entry into the regulatory sandbox.

J.  The
attorney general may deny applications in its discretion and a denial is not an
appealable agency action for the purposes of chapter 6, article 10 of this
title. END_STATUTE

START_STATUTE41-5604.  Consultation
with applicable agencies; admission authority; insurance products; investment
management

A.  The attorney general
must consult with an applicable agency before admitting a person into the
regulatory sandbox.  This consultation may include seeking information about:

1.  Whether the applicable
agency previously has either:

(a)  Issued a license or
other authorization to the applicant.

(b)  Investigated,
sanctioned or pursued legal action against the applicant.

2.  Whether the
applicant could obtain a license or other authorization from an applicable
agency after exiting the regulatory sandbox.

B.  Notwithstanding
subsection A of this section, the attorney general has sole authority to make
the final decision whether to admit a person into the regulatory sandbox. END_STATUTE

START_STATUTE41-5605.  Scope

A.  If
the attorney general approves an application for entry into the regulatory
sandbox, the applicant is deemed a sandbox participant and both of the following
apply:

1.  The
sandbox participant has twenty‑four months after the date of approval to
test the innovative financial product or service described in the sandbox
participant's application.

2.  The
attorney general must issue the sandbox participant a registration number.

B.  Innovative
financial products or services that are provided within the regulatory sandbox
are subject to the following restrictions:

1.  Consumers
must be residents of this state.

2.  Except
as provided in subsection C of this section, not more than ten thousand
consumers may transact through or enter into an agreement to use the
innovation.

3.  For
a sandbox participant testing consumer lender loans as defined in section 6‑601,
an individual consumer lender loan may be issued for up to fifteen thousand
dollars, except that aggregate loans per consumer may not exceed fifty thousand
dollars.  All consumer lender loans issued in the regulatory sandbox, including
loans in excess of ten thousand dollars, are subject to all of the following:

(a)  Section 6‑114.

(b)  Section 6‑632.

(c)  Section 6‑635,
subsections A, B and C.

(d)  Section 6‑637.

4.  except
as provided in subsection C of this section, for a sandbox participant testing
products or services as a money transmitter as defined in section 6-1201,
individual transactions per consumer may not exceed two thousand five hundred
dollars and aggregate transactions per consumer may not exceed twenty‑five
thousand dollars.

5.  For
sandbox participants testing products or services as a sales finance company as
defined in section 44‑281, all of the following apply:

(a)  Section 44‑286.

(b)  Section 44‑287,
except not section 44‑287, subsection B, paragraph 8.

(c)  Section 44‑288.

(d)  Section 44‑289.

(e)  Section 44‑290.

(f)  Section 44‑291.

(g)  Section 44‑293.

(h)  Section 47‑9601.

6.  For
sandbox participants testing products or services that provide investment
management that is regulated pursuant to title 44, chapter 13:

(a)  Section 44-3241 applies.

(b)  Each sandbox
participant must make, maintain and preserve books and records in accordance
with the requirements imposed on federal covered advisers under 17 code of
federal regulations section 275.204‑2.  The sandbox participant
shall file with the corporation commission a copy of any notices or written
undertakings required to be filed by federal covered advisers with the
Securities and Exchange commission under 17 code of federal regulations section
275.204‑2.

(c)  The corporation commission rules
adopted pursuant to title 44, chapter 13 apply as they relate to the following:

(i)  DIshonest and
unethical practices.

(ii)  Information required
to be furnished to clients.

(iii)  Custody of client
funds or securities.

(iv)  Disclosure of
financial and disciplinary information to clients.

C.  If
a sandbox participant demonstrates adequate financial capitalization, risk
management process and management oversight, the attorney general may allow
either or both of the following:

1.  Not
more than seventeen thousand five hundred consumers to transact through or
enter into an agreement to use the innovation.

2.  For
a sandbox participant testing products or services as a money transmitter as
defined in section 6‑1201, Individual transactions per consumer that do
not exceed fifteen thousand dollars and aggregate transactions per consumer
that do not exceed fifty thousand dollars.

D.  This
section does not restrict a sandbox participant who holds a license or other
authorization in another jurisdiction from acting pursuant to and in accordance
with that license or other authorization.

E.  A
sandbox participant is deemed to possess an appropriate license under the laws
of this state for purposes of any provision of federal law requiring state
licensure or authorization.

F.  Except
as otherwise provided in this chapter, a sandbox participant is not subject to
state laws that regulate a financial product or service.

G.  The
attorney general may determine that certain state laws that regulate a
financial product or service apply to a sandbox participant.  If the attorney
general makes this determination and approves an application for entry into the
regulatory sandbox, the attorney general must notify the sandbox participant of
the specific state regulatory laws that will apply to the sandbox participant.

H.  A
sandbox participant may obtain, record, provide or maintain in electronic form,
including as provided in section 44‑7601, any information, writing,
signature, record or disclosure that is required by this chapter or may
substitute any substantially similar equivalent information, writing,
signature, record or disclosure that is approved by the attorney general. END_STATUTE

START_STATUTE41-5606.  Consumer
protection

A.  Before
providing an innovative financial product or service to consumers, a sandbox
participant must disclose to consumers all of the following:

1.  The
name and contact information of the sandbox participant, including the
registration number provided by the attorney general pursuant to section
41-5605.

2.  That
the innovative financial product or service is authorized pursuant to the
regulatory sandbox and, if applicable, that the sandbox participant does not
have a license or other authorization to generally provide products or services
under state laws that regulate a financial product or service that is outside
the regulatory sandbox.

3.  That
this state does not endorse or recommend the innovation.

4.  That
the innovative financial product or service is a temporary test that may be
discontinued at the end of the testing period, including the expected end date
of the testing period.

5.  That
consumers may contact the attorney general to file complaints regarding the
innovative financial product or service being tested and provide the attorney
general's telephone number and website address where complaints may be filed.

B.  The
notifications prescribed by subsection A of this section must be provided to
consumers in a clear and conspicuous form in both English and
Spanish.  For internet or application-based innovative financial
products or services, consumers must acknowledge receipt of these notifications
before completion of a transaction.

C.  The
attorney general may require that a sandbox participant make additional
disclosures to consumers.  When the attorney general approves an application
for entry into the regulatory sandbox, the attorney general shall notify the
sandbox participant of the additional disclosures. END_STATUTE

START_STATUTE41-5607.  Exit
requirements

A.  At
least thirty days before the end of the twenty‑four month regulatory
sandbox testing period, a sandbox participant must either:

1.  Notify
the attorney general that the sandbox participant will exit the regulatory
sandbox, wind down its test and cease offering any innovative products or
services in the regulatory sandbox within sixty days after the twenty‑four‑month
testing period ends.

2.  Seek
an extension pursuant to section 41‑5608 to pursue a license or other
authorization required by law.

B.  If
the attorney general does not receive notification pursuant to subsection A of
this section, the regulatory sandbox testing period ends at the end of the
twenty‑four‑month testing period and the sandbox participant must
immediately cease offering innovative products or services.

C.  If
a test includes offering products or services that require ongoing duties, such
as servicing a loan, the sandbox participant must continue to fulfill those
duties or arrange for another person to fulfill those duties after the date the
sandbox participant exits the regulatory sandbox. END_STATUTE

START_STATUTE41-5608.  Extensions

A. A
sandbox participant may request an extension of the regulatory sandbox testing
period for the purpose of pursuing a license or other authorization required by
law.  

B.  The
attorney general may grant or deny a request for an extension pursuant to
subsection A of this section by the end of the twenty‑four‑month
regulatory sandbox testing period.  An extension pursuant to this
subsection is not effective for more than one year after the end of the
regulatory sandbox testing period.

C.  A
sandbox participant that obtains an extension pursuant to subsection B of this
section must provide the attorney general with a written report every three
months that provides an update on efforts to obtain a license or other authorization,
including any submitted applications for licensure or other authorization,
rejected applications or issued licenses or other authorization. END_STATUTE

START_STATUTE41-5609.  Recordkeeping
and reporting requirements

A.  A
sandbox participant must retain records, documents and data produced in the
ordinary course of business regarding an innovative financial product or
service tested in the regulatory sandbox.

B.  If
an innovation fails before the end of the testing period, the sandbox
participant must notify the attorney general and report on actions taken to
ensure consumers have not been harmed as a result of the innovation's failure.

C.  A
sandbox participant is subject to the requirements of section 18-545 and must
notify the attorney general of any breach as defined in section 18-545. END_STATUTE

START_STATUTE41-5610.  Records;
disclosure; evidentiary effect

A.  Records
that are submitted to or obtained by the attorney general in administering this
chapter are not public records or open for inspection by the public.

B.  Records
and information that are submitted or obtained pursuant to this chapter may be
disclosed to any of the following:

1.  State
and federal agencies.

2.  Representatives
of foreign countries that have regulatory or supervisory authority over the
activities of the sandbox participant.

3.  A federal, state or
county grand jury in response to a lawful subpoena.

4.  The state auditor
general for the purpose of conducting audits authorized by law.

C.  The attorney general
and any applicable agency consulted by the attorney general pursuant to section
41-5604 are not liable for the disclosure of records, information or data
received or obtained pursuant to this chapter.

D.  The disclosure
pursuant to subsection B of this section of a complaint or the results of an
examination, inquiry or investigation of a sandbox participant does not make
that information a public record and the sandbox participant or the sandbox
participant's holding company may not disclose that information to the general
public unless the disclosure is required by law.  A sandbox
participant or the sandbox participant's holding company may not disclose, use
or reference in any form comments, conclusions or results of an examination,
inquiry or investigation in any type of communication to a customer or
potential customer.

E.  This
section does not prevent the disclosure of information that is admissible in
evidence in a civil or criminal proceeding brought by a state or federal law
enforcement agency to enforce or prosecute civil or criminal violations of the
law. END_STATUTE

START_STATUTE41-5611.  Reporting
requirements; monitoring; enforcement; agreements

A.  The
attorney general may establish periodic reporting requirements on sandbox
participants.

B.  The attorney general
may seek records, documents and data from sandbox participants.  On
the attorney general's request, sandbox participants must make such records,
documents and data available for inspection by the attorney general.

C.  If the attorney
general has reasonable cause to believe that a sandbox participant has engaged
in, is engaging in or is about to engage in any practice or transaction that is
in violation of this chapter, that constitutes an unlawful practice under
section 44-1522 or that constitutes a violation of a state or federal criminal
law, the attorney general may remove a sandbox participant from the regulatory
sandbox or order a sandbox participant to exit the regulatory sandbox pursuant
to section 41‑5607.

D.  Removal
from the regulatory sandbox is not an appealable agency action for the purposes
of chapter 6, article 10 of this title.

E.  Sandbox
participants are subject to the consumer fraud provisions under title 44,
chapter 10, article 7.

F.  The
attorney general may enter into agreements with state, federal or foreign
regulators that allow sandbox participants to operate in other jurisdictions
and allow entities authorized to operate in other jurisdictions to be
recognized as sandbox participants in this state. END_STATUTE

START_STATUTE41-5612.  Program
termination

The
program established by this chapter ends on July 1, 2028 pursuant to section 41‑3102.
END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Section 44-1531.01, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE44-1531.01.  Consumer
protection-consumer fraud revolving fund; use of fund

A.  The
consumer protection-consumer fraud revolving fund is established to be
administered by the attorney general under the conditions and for the purposes
provided by this section.  Monies in the fund are subject to
legislative appropriation.  Monies in the fund are exempt from the
provisions of section 35‑190, relating to lapsing of appropriations.

B.  The fund consists
of the following:

1.  Any investigative or court costs,
attorney fees or civil penalties recovered for the state by the attorney
general as a result of enforcement of either state or federal statutes
pertaining to consumer protection or consumer fraud, whether by final judgment,
settlement or otherwise, shall
be deposited in the fund established by this section, except that the costs, penalties
or fees recovered by a county attorney shall be retained in the county and utilized used for investigative operations for
consumer protection in the county.

2.  Monies
deposited pursuant to section 41‑5603.

C.  The
attorney
general shall use the
monies in the fund shall
be used by the attorney general
for operating expenses, including any cost or expense associated with the
tobacco master settlement agreement arbitration, consumer fraud education and
investigative and enforcement operations of the consumer protection division.

D.  On
or before January 15, April 15, July 15 and October 15, the attorney general
shall file with the governor, with copies to the director of the department of
administration, the president of the senate, the speaker of the house of
representatives, the secretary of state and the staff director of the joint
legislative budget committee, a full and complete account of the receipts and
disbursements from the fund in the previous calendar quarter.

E.  On
or before January 15, April 15, July 15 and October 15, each county attorney
who retains monies pursuant to subsection B of this section shall provide the
county board of supervisors with a full and complete account of the receipts
and disbursements of the monies in the previous calendar quarter. END_STATUTE

