

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Title 15, chapter 1, article 1, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 15-118, to read:

START_STATUTE15-118.  Corporal
punishment policies; review; definition

A.  If
a school district or charter school allows corporal punishment, the school
district governing board or the charter school governing body shall review the
corporal punishment policy at a public meeting called within one year after the
effective date of this section and vote to either retain, revoke or modify the
policy.

B.  A
policy on corporal punishment prescribed in this section does not prevent the
use of any of the following:

1.  incidental,
minor or reasonable physical contact or other actions designed to maintain
order and control.

2.  Reasonable
and necessary force to quell a disturbance or remove a pupil from the scene of
a disturbance that threatens physical injury to a person or damage to property.

3.  Reasonable
and necessary force to prevent a pupil from inflicting physical harm on that
pupil.

4.  Reasonable
and necessary force for self-defense or the defense of others.

5.  Reasonable
and necessary force to obtain possession of a weapon or other dangerous object,
a controlled substance or paraphernalia that is within the pupil's possession
or control.

C.  For
the purposes of this section, "corporal punishment" means inflicting,
or causing the infliction of, physical pain on a pupil as a means of
discipline.  Corporal punishment does not include physical pain,
injury or discomfort caused by the use of incidental, minor or reasonable
physical contact or other actions designed to maintain order and control as allowed
by subsection B, paragraph 1 of this section, the use of reasonable and
necessary force as allowed by subsection B, paragraphs 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this
section, participation in practice or competition in an interscholastic sport
or participation in physical education or an extracurricular activity. END_STATUTE

