

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 12-820.01, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE12-820.01.  Absolute
immunity

A.  A
public entity shall is not be liable for acts and omissions of
its employees constituting either of the following:

1.  The
exercise of a judicial or legislative function.

2.  The
exercise of an administrative function involving the determination of
fundamental governmental policy.

B.  The
determination of a fundamental governmental policy involves the exercise of
discretion and shall
include, but is not limited to includes:

1.  A
determination of whether to seek or whether to provide the resources necessary
for any of the following:

(a)  The
purchase of equipment.

(b)  The
construction or maintenance of facilities.

(c)  The
hiring of personnel.

(d)  The
provision of governmental services.

2.  A
determination of whether and how to spend existing resources, including those
allocated for equipment, facilities and personnel.

3.  The
licensing and regulation of any profession or occupation.

4.  The
establishment, implementation and enforcement of minimum safety standards for
light rail transit systems
and street car systems.

5.  The
establishment, implementation and enforcement of minimum guidelines or
standards for transportation facilities. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 12-820.03, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE12-820.03.  Affirmative
defense; gross negligence liability

A.  Neither Except as provided in subsection B
of this section, a
public entity nor or a public employee is not liable for an injury arising out
of a plan or design for construction or maintenance of or improvement to
highways, roads, streets, bridges, 
or rights‑of‑way if the plan or design is prepared in conformance
with generally accepted engineering or design standards in effect at the time
of the preparation of the plan or design, provided, however, that and the public
entity or public employee gives to the public a reasonably adequate warning of hazards shall be given as to
any unreasonably dangerous hazards which would allow the public to take
suitable precautions.

B.  If
a public entity or public employee does not give a reasonably adequate warning
of hazards as prescribed by subsection A of this section, the public entity or
public employee is liable for an injury described in subsection A of this
section only if the public entity or public employee was grossly negligent. END_STATUTE

