

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Title 42, chapter 5, article 1, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 42‑5042, to read:

START_STATUTE42-5042.  Sunset
review of transaction privilege and use tax expenditures; definition

A.  Any
new transaction privilege or use tax expenditure that is enacted by the
legislature under this chapter shall include in its enabling legislation a
specific repeal date that is from and after December 31 of not later than the
eighth full calendar year following the date the tax expenditure is enacted.

B.  In
addition to the responsibilities prescribed by section 43‑221, the joint
legislative income tax credit review committee shall review each transaction
privilege and use tax expenditure under this chapter according to the same
standards prescribed by section 43‑221, subsection B to determine whether
the tax expenditure should be amended, retained or allowed to expire as
prescribed by law.  The committee shall report its recommendations to the
president of the senate, the speaker of the house of representatives and the
governor on or before December 15 of the year the committee reviews the tax
expenditure and shall provide a copy of the report to the secretary of state
and the director of the department of revenue.

C.  For the purposes of
this section, "tax expenditure" means any provision in this chapter
that exempts, in whole or in part, any person, income, goods, services or
property from the impact of established taxes and tax classifications,
including deductions, subtractions, exclusions, exemptions, allowances and
credits. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 42-5061, Arizona Revised
Statutes, as amended by Senate Bill 1010, section 11, fifty-third legislature,
first regular session, as transmitted to the governor, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE42-5061.  Retail
classification; definitions

A.  The
retail classification is comprised of the business of selling tangible personal
property at retail.  The tax base for the retail classification is
the gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from the
business.  The tax imposed on the retail classification does not
apply to the gross proceeds of sales or gross income from:

1.  Professional
or personal service occupations or businesses that involve sales or transfers
of tangible personal property only as inconsequential elements.

2.  Services
rendered in addition to selling tangible personal property at retail.

3.  Sales
of warranty or service contracts.  The storage, use or consumption of
tangible personal property provided under the conditions of such contracts is
subject to tax under section 42‑5156.

4.  Sales
of tangible personal property by any nonprofit organization organized and
operated exclusively for charitable purposes and recognized by the United
States internal revenue service under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue
code.

5.  Sales
to persons engaged in business classified under the restaurant classification
of articles used by human beings for food, drink or condiment, whether simple,
mixed or compounded.

6.  Business
activity that is properly included in any other business classification that is
taxable under this article.

7.  The
sale of stocks and bonds.

8.  Drugs
and medical oxygen, including delivery hose, mask or tent, regulator and tank,
on the prescription of a member of the medical, dental or veterinarian
profession who is licensed by law to administer such substances.

9.  Prosthetic
appliances as defined in section 23‑501 and as prescribed or recommended
by a health professional who is licensed pursuant to title 32, chapter 7, 8,
11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 or 29.

10.  Insulin,
insulin syringes and glucose test strips.

11.  Prescription
eyeglasses or contact lenses.

12.  Hearing
aids as defined in section 36‑1901.

13.  Durable
medical equipment that has a centers for medicare and medicaid services common
procedure code, is designated reimbursable by medicare, is prescribed by a
person who is licensed under title 32, chapter 7, 8, 13, 14, 15, 17 or 29, can
withstand repeated use, is primarily and customarily used to serve a medical
purpose, is generally not useful to a person in the absence of illness or
injury and is appropriate for use in the home.

14.  Sales
of motor vehicles to nonresidents of this state for use outside this state if
the motor vehicle dealer ships or delivers the motor vehicle to a destination
out of this state.

15.  Food,
as provided in and subject to the conditions of article 3 of this chapter and
section 42‑5074.

16.  Items
purchased with United States department of agriculture food stamp coupons
issued under the food stamp act of 1977 (P.L. 95‑113; 91 Stat. 958) or
food instruments issued under section 17 of the child nutrition act (P.L. 95‑627;
92 Stat. 3603; P.L. 99‑661, section 4302; 42 United States Code section
1786).

17.  Textbooks
by any bookstore that are required by any state university or community
college.

18.  Food
and drink to a person that is engaged in a business that is classified under
the restaurant classification and that provides such food and drink without
monetary charge to its employees for their own consumption on the premises
during the employees' hours of employment.

19.  Articles
of food, drink or condiment and accessory tangible personal property to a
school district or charter school if such articles and accessory tangible
personal property are to be prepared and served to persons for consumption on
the premises of a public school within the district or on the premises of the
charter school during school hours.

20.  Lottery
tickets or shares pursuant to title 5, chapter 5.1, article 1.

21.  The
sale of cash equivalents and the sale of precious metal bullion and monetized
bullion to the ultimate consumer, but the sale of coins or other forms of money
for manufacture into jewelry or works of art is subject to the tax and the
gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from the redemption of any cash
equivalent by the holder as a means of payment for goods or services that are
taxable under this article is subject to the tax.  For the purposes
of this paragraph:

(a)  "Cash
equivalents" means items or intangibles, whether or not negotiable, that
are sold to one or more persons, through which a value denominated in money is
purchased in advance and may be redeemed in full or in part for tangible
personal property, intangibles or services.  Cash equivalents include
gift cards, stored value cards, gift certificates, vouchers, traveler's checks,
money orders or other instruments, orders or electronic mechanisms, such as an
electronic code, personal identification number or digital payment mechanism,
or any other prepaid intangible right to acquire tangible personal property,
intangibles or services in the future, whether from the seller of the cash
equivalent or from another person.  Cash equivalents do not include either
of the following:

(i)  Items
or intangibles that are sold to one or more persons, through which a value is
not denominated in money.

(ii)  Prepaid
calling cards or prepaid authorization numbers for telecommunications services
made taxable by subsection P of this section. 

(b)  "Monetized
bullion" means coins and other forms of money that are manufactured from
gold, silver or other metals and that have been or are used as a medium of
exchange in this or another state, the United States or a foreign nation.

(c)  "Precious
metal bullion" means precious metal, including gold, silver, platinum,
rhodium and palladium, that has been smelted or refined so that its value
depends on its contents and not on its form.

22.  Motor
vehicle fuel and use fuel that are subject to a tax imposed under title 28,
chapter 16, article 1, sales of use fuel to a holder of a valid single trip use
fuel tax permit issued under section 28‑5739, sales of aviation fuel
that are subject to the tax imposed under section 28‑8344 and sales of
jet fuel that are subject to the tax imposed under article 8 of this chapter.

23.  Tangible
personal property sold to a person engaged in the business of leasing or
renting such property under the personal property rental classification if such
property is to be leased or rented by such person.

24.  Tangible
personal property sold in interstate or foreign commerce if prohibited from
being so taxed by the constitution of the United States or the constitution of
this state.

25.  Tangible
personal property sold to:

(a)  A
qualifying hospital as defined in section 42‑5001.

(b)  A
qualifying health care organization as defined in section 42‑5001 if
the tangible personal property is used by the organization solely to provide
health and medical related educational and charitable services.

(c)  A
qualifying health care organization as defined in section 42‑5001 if
the organization is dedicated to providing educational, therapeutic,
rehabilitative and family medical education training for blind and visually
impaired children and children with multiple disabilities from the time of
birth to age twenty‑one.

(d)  A
qualifying community health center as defined in section 42‑5001.

(e)  A
nonprofit charitable organization that has qualified under section 501(c)(3) of
the internal revenue code and that regularly serves meals to the needy and
indigent on a continuing basis at no cost.

(f)  For
taxable periods beginning from and after June 30, 2001, a nonprofit charitable
organization that has qualified under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue
code and that provides residential apartment housing for low income persons
over sixty‑two years of age in a facility that qualifies for a federal
housing subsidy, if the tangible personal property is used by the organization
solely to provide residential apartment housing for low income persons over
sixty‑two years of age in a facility that qualifies for a federal housing
subsidy.

(g)  A
qualifying health sciences educational institution as defined in section 42‑5001.

(h)  Any
person representing or working on behalf of another person described in
subdivisions (a) through (g) of this paragraph if the tangible personal
property is incorporated or fabricated into a project described in section 42‑5075,
subsection O.

26.  Magazines
or other periodicals or other publications by this state to encourage tourist
travel.

27.  Tangible
personal property sold to:

(a)  A
person that is subject to tax under this article by reason of being engaged in
business classified under section 42‑5075 or to a subcontractor working
under the control of a person engaged in business classified under section 42‑5075,
if the property so sold is any of the following:

(i)  Incorporated
or fabricated by the person into any real property, structure, project,
development or improvement as part of the business.

(ii)  Incorporated
or fabricated by the person into any project described in section 42‑5075,
subsection O.

(iii)  Used
in environmental response or remediation activities under section 42‑5075,
subsection B, paragraph 6.

(b)  A
person that is not subject to tax under section 42‑5075 and that has been
provided a copy of a certificate under section 42‑5009,
subsection L, if the property so sold is incorporated or fabricated by the
person into the real property, structure, project, development or improvement
described in the certificate.

28.  The
sale of a motor vehicle to:

(a)  A
nonresident of this state if the purchaser's state of residence does not allow
a corresponding use tax exemption to the tax imposed by article 1 of this
chapter and if the nonresident has secured a special ninety day nonresident
registration permit for the vehicle as prescribed by sections 28‑2154 and
28‑2154.01.

(b)  An
enrolled member of an Indian tribe who resides on the Indian reservation
established for that tribe.

29.  Tangible
personal property purchased in this state by a nonprofit charitable
organization that has qualified under section 501(c)(3) of the United States
internal revenue code and that engages in and uses such property exclusively in
programs for persons with mental or physical disabilities if the programs are
exclusively for training, job placement, rehabilitation or testing.

30.  Sales
of tangible personal property by a nonprofit organization that is exempt from
taxation under section 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4) or 501(c)(6) of the internal
revenue code if the organization is associated with a major league baseball
team or a national touring professional golfing association and no part of the
organization's net earnings inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or
individual.

31.  Sales
of commodities, as defined by title 7 United States Code section 2, that are
consigned for resale in a warehouse in this state in or from which the
commodity is deliverable on a contract for future delivery subject to the rules
of a commodity market regulated by the United States commodity futures trading
commission.

32.  Sales
of tangible personal property by a nonprofit organization that is exempt from
taxation under section 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4), 501(c)(6), 501(c)(7) or 501(c)(8)
of the internal revenue code if the organization sponsors or operates a rodeo
featuring primarily farm and ranch animals and no part of the organization's
net earnings inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.

33.  Sales
of seeds, seedlings, roots, bulbs, cuttings and other propagative material to
persons who use those items to commercially produce agricultural,
horticultural, viticultural or floricultural crops in this state.

34.  Machinery,
equipment, technology or related supplies that are only useful to assist a
person with a physical disability as defined in section 46‑191 or a
person who has a developmental disability as defined in section 36‑551 or
has a head injury as defined in section 41‑3201 to be more independent
and functional.

35.  Sales
of natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas used to propel a motor vehicle.

36.  Paper
machine clothing, such as forming fabrics and dryer felts, sold to a paper
manufacturer and directly used or consumed in paper manufacturing.

37.  Coal,
petroleum, coke, natural gas, virgin fuel oil and electricity sold to a
qualified environmental technology manufacturer, producer or processor as
defined in section 41‑1514.02 and directly used or consumed in the
generation or provision of on-site power or energy solely for environmental
technology manufacturing, producing or processing or environmental
protection.  This paragraph shall apply for twenty full consecutive
calendar or fiscal years from the date the first paper manufacturing machine is
placed in service.  In the case of an environmental technology
manufacturer, producer or processor who does not manufacture paper, the time
period shall begin with the date the first manufacturing, processing or production
equipment is placed in service.

38.  Sales
of liquid, solid or gaseous chemicals used in manufacturing, processing,
fabricating, mining, refining, metallurgical operations, research and
development and, beginning on January 1, 1999, printing, if using or consuming
the chemicals, alone or as part of an integrated system of chemicals, involves
direct contact with the materials from which the product is produced for the
purpose of causing or permitting a chemical or physical change to occur in the
materials as part of the production process.  This paragraph does not
include chemicals that are used or consumed in activities such as packaging,
storage or transportation but does not affect any deduction for such chemicals
that is otherwise provided by this section.  For the purposes of this
paragraph, "printing" means a commercial printing operation and
includes job printing, engraving, embossing, copying and bookbinding.

39.  Through
December 31, 1994, personal property liquidation transactions, conducted by a
personal property liquidator.  From and after December 31, 1994,
personal property liquidation transactions shall be taxable under this section
provided that nothing in this subsection shall be construed to authorize the
taxation of casual activities or transactions under this
chapter.  For the purposes of this paragraph:

(a)  "Personal
property liquidation transaction" means a sale of personal property made
by a personal property liquidator acting solely on behalf of the owner of the
personal property sold at the dwelling of the owner or on the death of any
owner, on behalf of the surviving spouse, if any, any devisee or heir or the
personal representative of the estate of the deceased, if one has been
appointed.

(b)  "Personal
property liquidator" means a person who is retained to conduct a sale in a
personal property liquidation transaction.

40.  Sales
of food, drink and condiment for consumption within the premises of any prison,
jail or other institution under the jurisdiction of the state department of
corrections, the department of public safety, the department of juvenile
corrections or a county sheriff.

41.  A
motor vehicle and any repair and replacement parts and tangible personal
property becoming a part of such motor vehicle sold to a motor carrier who is
subject to a fee prescribed in title 28, chapter 16, article 4 and who is
engaged in the business of leasing or renting such property.

42.  Sales
of:

(a)  Livestock
and poultry to persons engaging in the businesses of farming, ranching or producing
livestock or poultry.

(b)  Livestock
and poultry feed, salts, vitamins and other additives for livestock or poultry
consumption that are sold to persons for use or consumption by their own
livestock or poultry, for use or consumption in the businesses of farming,
ranching and producing or feeding livestock, poultry, or livestock or poultry
products or for use or consumption in noncommercial boarding of
livestock.  For the purposes of this paragraph, "poultry"
includes ratites.

43.  Sales
of implants used as growth promotants and injectable medicines, not already
exempt under paragraph 8 of this subsection, for livestock or poultry owned by
or in possession of persons who are engaged in producing livestock, poultry, or
livestock or poultry products or who are engaged in feeding livestock or
poultry commercially.  For the purposes of this paragraph,
"poultry" includes ratites.

44.  Sales
of motor vehicles at auction to nonresidents of this state for use outside this
state if the vehicles are shipped or delivered out of this state, regardless of
where title to the motor vehicles passes or its free on board point.

45.  Tangible
personal property sold to a person engaged in business and subject to tax under
the transient lodging classification if the tangible personal property is a
personal hygiene item or articles used by human beings for food, drink or
condiment, except alcoholic beverages, that are furnished without additional
charge to and intended to be consumed by the transient during the transient's occupancy.

46.  Sales
of alternative fuel, as defined in section 1‑215, to a used oil fuel
burner who has received a permit to burn used oil or used oil fuel under
section 49‑426 or 49‑480.

47.  Sales
of materials that are purchased by or for publicly funded libraries including
school district libraries, charter school libraries, community college
libraries, state university libraries or federal, state, county or municipal
libraries for use by the public as follows:

(a)  Printed
or photographic materials, beginning August 7, 1985.

(b)  Electronic
or digital media materials, beginning July 17, 1994.

48.  Tangible
personal property sold to a commercial airline and consisting of food,
beverages and condiments and accessories used for serving the food and beverages,
if those items are to be provided without additional charge to passengers for
consumption in flight.  For the purposes of this paragraph,
"commercial airline" means a person holding a federal certificate of
public convenience and necessity or foreign air carrier permit for air
transportation to transport persons, property or United States mail in
intrastate, interstate or foreign commerce.

49.  Sales
of alternative fuel vehicles if the vehicle was manufactured as a diesel fuel
vehicle and converted to operate on alternative fuel and equipment that is
installed in a conventional diesel fuel motor vehicle to convert the vehicle to
operate on an alternative fuel, as defined in section 1‑215.

50.  Sales
of any spirituous, vinous or malt liquor by a person that is licensed in this
state as a wholesaler by the department of liquor licenses and control pursuant
to title 4, chapter 2, article 1.

51.  Sales
of tangible personal property to be incorporated or installed as part of
environmental response or remediation activities under section 42‑5075,
subsection B, paragraph 6.

52.  Sales
of tangible personal property by a nonprofit organization that is exempt from
taxation under section 501(c)(6) of the internal revenue code if the
organization produces, organizes or promotes cultural or civic related
festivals or events and no part of the organization's net earnings inures to
the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.

53.  Application
services that are designed to assess or test student learning or to promote
curriculum design or enhancement purchased by or for any school district,
charter school, community college or state university.  For the
purposes of this paragraph:

(a)  "Application
services" means software applications provided remotely using hypertext
transfer protocol or another network protocol.

(b)  "Curriculum
design or enhancement" means planning, implementing or reporting on
courses of study, lessons, assignments or other learning activities.

54.  Sales
of motor vehicle fuel and use fuel to a qualified business under section 41‑1516
for off-road use in harvesting, processing or transporting qualifying forest
products removed from qualifying projects as defined in section 41‑1516.

55.  Sales
of repair parts installed in equipment used directly by a qualified business
under section 41‑1516 in harvesting, processing or transporting
qualifying forest products removed from qualifying projects as defined in
section 41‑1516.

56.  Sales
or other transfers of renewable energy credits or any other unit created to
track energy derived from renewable energy resources.  For the
purposes of this paragraph, "renewable energy credit" means a unit
created administratively by the corporation commission or governing body of a
public power utility to track kilowatt hours of electricity derived from a
renewable energy resource or the kilowatt hour equivalent of conventional
energy resources displaced by distributed renewable energy resources.

57.  Computer
data center equipment sold to the owner, operator or qualified colocation
tenant of a computer data center that is certified by the Arizona commerce
authority under section 41‑1519 or an authorized agent of the owner,
operator or qualified colocation tenant during the qualification period for use
in the qualified computer data center.  For the purposes of this
paragraph, "computer data center", "computer data center
equipment", "qualification period" and "qualified
colocation tenant" have the same meanings prescribed in section 41‑1519.

58.  Orthodontic
devices dispensed by a dental professional who is licensed under title 32,
chapter 11 to a patient as part of the practice of dentistry.

59.  Sales
of tangible personal property incorporated or fabricated into a project
described in section 42‑5075, subsection O, that is located within the
exterior boundaries of an Indian reservation for which the owner, as defined in
section 42‑5075, of the project is an Indian tribe or an affiliated
Indian.  For the purposes of this paragraph:

(a)  "Affiliated
Indian" means an individual native American Indian who is duly registered
on the tribal rolls of the Indian tribe for whose benefit the Indian
reservation was established.

(b)  "Indian
reservation" means all lands that are within the limits of areas set aside
by the United States for the exclusive use and occupancy of an Indian tribe by
treaty, law or executive order and that are recognized as Indian reservations
by the United States department of the interior.

(c)  "Indian
tribe" means any organized nation, tribe, band or community that is
recognized as an Indian tribe by the United States department of the interior
and includes any entity formed under the laws of the Indian tribe.

60.  Sales
of works of fine art, as defined in section 44‑1771, at an art auction or
gallery in this state to nonresidents of this state for use outside this state
if the vendor ships or delivers the work of fine art to a destination outside
this state.

B.  In
addition to the deductions from the tax base prescribed by subsection A of this
section, the gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from sales of the
following categories of tangible personal property shall be deducted from the
tax base:

1.  Machinery,
or equipment, used directly in manufacturing, processing, fabricating, job
printing, refining or metallurgical operations.  The terms
"manufacturing", "processing", "fabricating",
"job printing", "refining" and "metallurgical" as
used in this paragraph refer to and include those operations commonly
understood within their ordinary meaning.  "Metallurgical
operations" includes leaching, milling, precipitating, smelting and
refining.

2.  Mining
machinery, or equipment, used directly in the process of extracting ores or
minerals from the earth for commercial purposes, including equipment required
to prepare the materials for extraction and handling, loading or transporting
such extracted material to the surface.  "Mining" includes
underground, surface and open pit operations for extracting ores and minerals.

3.  Tangible
personal property sold to persons engaged in business classified under the
telecommunications classification, including a person representing or working
on behalf of such a person in a manner described in section 42‑5075,
subsection O, and consisting of central office switching equipment,
switchboards, private branch exchange equipment, microwave radio equipment and
carrier equipment including optical fiber, coaxial cable and other transmission
media that are components of carrier systems.

4.  Machinery,
equipment or transmission lines used directly in producing or transmitting
electrical power, but not including distribution.  Transformers and
control equipment used at transmission substation sites constitute equipment
used in producing or transmitting electrical power.

5.  Neat
animals, horses, asses, sheep, ratites, swine or goats used or to be used as
breeding or production stock, including sales of breedings or ownership shares
in such animals used for breeding or production.

6.  Pipes
or valves four inches in diameter or larger used to transport oil, natural gas,
artificial gas, water or coal slurry, including compressor units, regulators,
machinery and equipment, fittings, seals and any other part that is used in
operating the pipes or valves.

7.  Aircraft,
navigational and communication instruments and other accessories and related
equipment sold to:

(a)  A
person:

(i)  Holding,
or exempted by federal law from obtaining, a federal certificate of public
convenience and necessity for use as, in conjunction with or becoming part of
an aircraft to be used to transport persons for hire in intrastate, interstate
or foreign commerce. 

(ii)  That
is certificated or licensed under federal aviation regulations (14 Code of
Federal Regulations part 121 or 135) as a scheduled or unscheduled carrier of
persons for hire for use as or in conjunction with or becoming part of an
aircraft to be used to transport persons for hire in intrastate, interstate or
foreign commerce. 

(iii)  Holding
a foreign air carrier permit for air transportation for use as or in
conjunction with or becoming a part of aircraft to be used to transport
persons, property or United States mail in intrastate, interstate or foreign
commerce.

(iv)  Operating
an aircraft to transport persons in any manner for compensation or hire
including as an air carrier, a foreign air carrier or a commercial operator or
under a restricted category, within the meaning of 14 Code of Federal
Regulations, regardless of whether the operation or aircraft is regulated or
certified under part 91, 119, 121, 133, 135, 136 or 137, or another part of 14
Code of Federal Regulations.

(v)  That
will lease or otherwise transfer operational control, within the meaning of
federal aviation administration operations specification A008, or its
successor, of the aircraft, instruments or accessories to one or more persons
described in item (i), (ii), (iii) or (iv) of this subdivision, subject to
section 42-5009, subsection Q.

(b)  Any
foreign government.

(c)  Persons
who are not residents of this state and who will not use such property in this
state other than in removing such property from this state.  This
subdivision also applies to corporations that are not incorporated in this
state, regardless of maintaining a place of business in this state, if the principal
corporate office is located outside this state and the property will not be
used in this state other than in removing the property from this state.

8.  Machinery,
tools, equipment and related supplies used or consumed directly in repairing,
remodeling or maintaining aircraft, aircraft engines or aircraft component
parts by or on behalf of a certificated or licensed carrier of persons or
property.

9.  Railroad
rolling stock, rails, ties and signal control equipment used directly to
transport persons or property.

10.  Machinery
or equipment used directly to drill for oil or gas or used directly in the
process of extracting oil or gas from the earth for commercial purposes.

11.  Buses
or other urban mass transit vehicles that are used directly to transport
persons or property for hire or pursuant to a governmentally adopted and
controlled urban mass transportation program and that are sold to bus companies
holding a federal certificate of convenience and necessity or operated by any
city, town or other governmental entity or by any person contracting with such
governmental entity as part of a governmentally adopted and controlled program
to provide urban mass transportation.

12.  Groundwater
measuring devices required under section 45‑604.

13.  New
machinery and equipment consisting of agricultural aircraft, tractors, tractor‑drawn
implements, self‑powered implements, machinery and equipment necessary
for extracting milk, and machinery and equipment necessary for cooling milk and
livestock, and drip irrigation lines not already exempt under paragraph 6 of
this subsection and that are used for commercial production of agricultural,
horticultural, viticultural and floricultural crops and products in this
state.  For the purposes of this paragraph:

(a)  "New
machinery and equipment" means machinery and equipment that have never
been sold at retail except pursuant to leases or rentals that do not total two
years or more.

(b)  "Self‑powered
implements" includes machinery and equipment that are electric‑powered.

14.  Machinery
or equipment used in research and development.  For the purposes of
this paragraph, "research and development" means basic and applied
research in the sciences and engineering, and designing, developing or testing
prototypes, processes or new products, including research and development of
computer software that is embedded in or an integral part of the prototype or
new product or that is required for machinery or equipment otherwise exempt
under this section to function effectively.  Research and development
do not include manufacturing quality control, routine consumer product testing,
market research, sales promotion, sales service, research in social sciences or
psychology, computer software research that is not included in the definition
of research and development, or other nontechnological activities or technical
services.

15.  Tangible
personal property that is used by either of the following to receive, store,
convert, produce, generate, decode, encode, control or transmit
telecommunications information:

(a)  Any
direct broadcast satellite television or data transmission service that
operates pursuant to 47 Code of Federal Regulations part 25.

(b)  Any
satellite television or data transmission facility, if both of the following
conditions are met:

(i)  Over
two‑thirds of the transmissions, measured in megabytes, transmitted by
the facility during the test period were transmitted to or on behalf of one or
more direct broadcast satellite television or data transmission services that
operate pursuant to 47 Code of Federal Regulations part 25.

(ii)  Over
two‑thirds of the transmissions, measured in megabytes, transmitted by or
on behalf of those direct broadcast television or data transmission services
during the test period were transmitted by the facility to or on behalf of
those services.

For
the purposes of subdivision (b) of this paragraph, "test period"
means the three hundred sixty‑five day period beginning on the later of
the date on which the tangible personal property is purchased or the date on
which the direct broadcast satellite television or data transmission service
first transmits information to its customers.

16.  Clean
rooms that are used for manufacturing, processing, fabrication or research and
development, as defined in paragraph 14 of this subsection, of semiconductor
products.  For the purposes of this paragraph, "clean room"
means all property that comprises or creates an environment where humidity,
temperature, particulate matter and contamination are precisely controlled
within specified parameters, without regard to whether the property is actually
contained within that environment or whether any of the property is affixed to
or incorporated into real property.  Clean room:

(a)  Includes
the integrated systems, fixtures, piping, movable partitions, lighting and all
property that is necessary or adapted to reduce contamination or to control
airflow, temperature, humidity, chemical purity or other environmental
conditions or manufacturing tolerances, as well as the production machinery and
equipment operating in conjunction with the clean room environment.

(b)  Does
not include the building or other permanent, nonremovable component of the building
that houses the clean room environment.

17.  Machinery
and equipment used directly in the feeding of poultry, the environmental
control of housing for poultry, the movement of eggs within a production and
packaging facility or the sorting or cooling of eggs.  This exemption
does not apply to vehicles used for transporting eggs.

18.  Machinery
or equipment, including related structural components, that is employed in
connection with manufacturing, processing, fabricating, job printing, refining,
mining, natural gas pipelines, metallurgical operations, telecommunications,
producing or transmitting electricity or research and development and that is
used directly to meet or exceed rules or regulations adopted by the federal
energy regulatory commission, the United States environmental protection
agency, the United States nuclear regulatory commission, the Arizona department
of environmental quality or a political subdivision of this state to prevent,
monitor, control or reduce land, water or air pollution.

19.  Machinery
and equipment that are sold to a person engaged in the commercial production of
livestock, livestock products or agricultural, horticultural, viticultural or
floricultural crops or products in this state, including a person representing
or working on behalf of such a person in a manner described in section 42‑5075,
subsection O, if the machinery and equipment are used directly and primarily to
prevent, monitor, control or reduce air, water or land pollution.

20.  Machinery
or equipment that enables a television station to originate and broadcast or to
receive and broadcast digital television signals and that was purchased to
facilitate compliance with the telecommunications act of 1996 (P.L. 104‑104;
110 Stat. 56; 47 United States Code section 336) and the federal communications
commission order issued April 21, 1997 (47 Code of Federal Regulations part
73).  This paragraph does not exempt any of the following:

(a)  Repair
or replacement parts purchased for the machinery or equipment described in this
paragraph.

(b)  Machinery
or equipment purchased to replace machinery or equipment for which an exemption
was previously claimed and taken under this paragraph.

(c)  Any
machinery or equipment purchased after the television station has ceased analog
broadcasting, or purchased after November 1, 2009, whichever occurs first.

21.  Qualifying
equipment that is purchased from and after June 30, 2004 through June 30, 2024
by a qualified business under section 41‑1516 for harvesting or
processing qualifying forest products removed from qualifying projects as
defined in section 41‑1516.  To qualify for this deduction, the
qualified business at the time of purchase must present its certification
approved by the department.

C.  The
deductions provided by subsection B of this section do not include sales of:

1.  Expendable
materials.  For the purposes of this paragraph, expendable materials
do not include any of the categories of tangible personal property specified in
subsection B of this section regardless of the cost or useful life of that
property.

2.  Janitorial
equipment and hand tools.

3.  Office
equipment, furniture and supplies.

4.  Tangible
personal property used in selling or distributing activities, other than the
telecommunications transmissions described in subsection B, paragraph 15 of
this section.

5.  Motor
vehicles required to be licensed by this state, except buses or other urban
mass transit vehicles specifically exempted pursuant to subsection B, paragraph
11 of this section, without regard to the use of such motor vehicles.

6.  Shops,
buildings, docks, depots and all other materials of whatever kind or character
not specifically included as exempt.

7.  Motors
and pumps used in drip irrigation systems.

8.  Machinery
and equipment or other tangible personal property used by a contractor in the
performance of a contract.

D.  In
addition to the deductions from the tax base prescribed by subsection A of this
section, there shall be deducted from the tax base the gross proceeds of sales
or gross income derived from sales of machinery, equipment, materials and other
tangible personal property used directly and predominantly to construct a
qualified environmental technology manufacturing, producing or processing
facility as described in section 41‑1514.02.  This subsection
applies for ten full consecutive calendar or fiscal years after the start of
initial construction.

E.  In
computing the tax base, gross proceeds of sales or gross income from retail
sales of heavy trucks and trailers does not include any amount attributable to
federal excise taxes imposed by 26 United States Code section 4051.

F.  If
a person is engaged in an occupation or business to which subsection A of this
section applies, the person's books shall be kept so as to show separately the
gross proceeds of sales of tangible personal property and the gross income from
sales of services, and if not so kept the tax shall be imposed on the total of
the person's gross proceeds of sales of tangible personal property and gross
income from services.

G.  If
a person is engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at
both wholesale and retail, the tax under this section applies only to the gross
proceeds of the sales made other than at wholesale if the person's books are
kept so as to show separately the gross proceeds of sales of each class, and if
the books are not so kept, the tax under this section applies to the gross
proceeds of every sale so made.

H.  A
person who engages in manufacturing, baling, crating, boxing, barreling,
canning, bottling, sacking, preserving, processing or otherwise preparing for
sale or commercial use any livestock, agricultural or horticultural product or
any other product, article, substance or commodity and who sells the product of
such business at retail in this state is deemed, as to such sales, to be
engaged in business classified under the retail classification.  This
subsection does not apply to:

1.  Agricultural
producers who are owners, proprietors or tenants of agricultural lands,
orchards, farms or gardens where agricultural products are grown, raised or
prepared for market and who are marketing their own agricultural products.

2.  Businesses
classified under the:

(a)  Transporting
classification.

(b)  Utilities
classification.

(c)  Telecommunications
classification.

(d)  Pipeline
classification.

(e)  Private
car line classification.

(f)  Publication
classification.

(g)  Job
printing classification.

(h)  Prime
contracting classification.

(i)  Restaurant
classification.

I.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from the following shall be
deducted from the tax base for the retail classification:

1.  Sales
made directly to the United States government or its departments or agencies by
a manufacturer, modifier, assembler or repairer.

2.  Sales
made directly to a manufacturer, modifier, assembler or repairer if such sales
are of any ingredient or component part of products sold directly to the United
States government or its departments or agencies by the manufacturer, modifier,
assembler or repairer.

3.  Overhead
materials or other tangible personal property that is used in performing a
contract between the United States government and a manufacturer, modifier,
assembler or repairer, including property used in performing a subcontract with
a government contractor who is a manufacturer, modifier, assembler or repairer,
to which title passes to the government under the terms of the contract or
subcontract.

4.  Sales
of overhead materials or other tangible personal property to a manufacturer,
modifier, assembler or repairer if the gross proceeds of sales or gross income
derived from the property by the manufacturer, modifier, assembler or repairer
will be exempt under paragraph 3 of this subsection.

J.  There
shall be deducted from the tax base fifty percent of the gross proceeds or
gross income from any sale of tangible personal property made directly to the
United States government or its departments or agencies that is not deducted
under subsection I of this section.

K.  The
department shall require every person claiming a deduction provided by
subsection I or J of this section to file on forms prescribed by the department
at such times as the department directs a sworn statement disclosing the name
of the purchaser and the exact amount of sales on which the exclusion or
deduction is claimed.

L.  In
computing the tax base, gross proceeds of sales or gross income does not
include:

1.  A
manufacturer's cash rebate on the sales price of a motor vehicle if the buyer
assigns the buyer's right in the rebate to the retailer.

2.  The
waste tire disposal fee imposed pursuant to section 44‑1302.

M.  There
shall be deducted from the tax base the amount received from sales of solar
energy devices.  The retailer shall register with the department as a
solar energy retailer.  By registering, the retailer acknowledges
that it will make its books and records relating to sales of solar energy
devices available to the department for examination.

N.  In
computing the tax base in the case of the sale or transfer of wireless
telecommunications equipment as an inducement to a customer to enter into or
continue a contract for telecommunications services that are taxable under
section 42‑5064, gross proceeds of sales or gross income does not include
any sales commissions or other compensation received by the retailer as a
result of the customer entering into or continuing a contract for the
telecommunications services.

O.  For
the purposes of this section, a sale of wireless telecommunications equipment
to a person who holds the equipment for sale or transfer to a customer as an
inducement to enter into or continue a contract for telecommunications services
that are taxable under section 42‑5064 is considered to be a sale
for resale in the regular course of business.

P.  Retail
sales of prepaid calling cards or prepaid authorization numbers for
telecommunications services, including sales of reauthorization of a prepaid
card or authorization number, are subject to tax under this section.

Q.  For
the purposes of this section, the diversion of gas from a pipeline by a person
engaged in the business of:

1.  Operating
a natural or artificial gas pipeline, for the sole purpose of fueling
compressor equipment to pressurize the pipeline, is not a sale of the gas to
the operator of the pipeline.

2.  Converting
natural gas into liquefied natural gas, for the sole purpose of fueling
compressor equipment used in the conversion process, is not a sale of gas to
the operator of the compressor equipment.

R.  For
the purposes of this section, the transfer of title or possession of coal from
an owner or operator of a power plant to a person in the business of refining
coal is not a sale of coal if both of the following apply:

1.  The
transfer of title or possession of the coal is for the purpose of refining the
coal.

2.  The
title or possession of the coal is transferred back to the owner or operator of
the power plant after completion of the coal refining process.  For
the purposes of this paragraph, "coal refining process" means the application
of a coal additive system that aids in the reduction of power plant emissions
during the combustion of coal and the treatment of flue gas.

S.  If
a seller is entitled to a deduction pursuant to subsection B, paragraph 15,
subdivision (b) of this section, the department may require the purchaser to
establish that the requirements of subsection B, paragraph 15, subdivision (b)
of this section have been satisfied.  If the purchaser cannot
establish that the requirements of subsection B, paragraph 15, subdivision (b)
of this section have been satisfied, the purchaser is liable in an amount equal
to any tax, penalty and interest that the seller would have been required to
pay under article 1 of this chapter if the seller had not made a deduction
pursuant to subsection B, paragraph 15, subdivision (b) of this
section.  Payment of the amount under this subsection exempts the
purchaser from liability for any tax imposed under article 4 of this chapter
and related to the tangible personal property purchased.  The amount
shall be treated as transaction privilege tax to the purchaser and as tax
revenues collected from the seller to designate the distribution base pursuant
to section 42‑5029.

T.  For
the purposes of section 42‑5032.01, the department shall separately
account for revenues collected under the retail classification from businesses
selling tangible personal property at retail:

1.  On
the premises of a multipurpose facility that is owned, leased or operated by
the tourism and sports authority pursuant to title 5, chapter 8.

2.  At
professional football contests that are held in a stadium located on the campus
of an institution under the jurisdiction of the Arizona board of regents.

U.  In
computing the tax base for the sale of a motor vehicle to a nonresident of this
state, if the purchaser's state of residence allows a corresponding use tax
exemption to the tax imposed by article 1 of this chapter and the rate of the
tax in the purchaser's state of residence is lower than the rate prescribed in
article 1 of this chapter or if the purchaser's state of residence does not
impose an excise tax, and the nonresident has secured a special ninety day
nonresident registration permit for the vehicle as prescribed by sections 28‑2154
and 28‑2154.01, there shall be deducted from the tax base a portion of
the gross proceeds or gross income from the sale so that the amount of
transaction privilege tax that is paid in this state is equal to the excise tax
that is imposed by the purchaser's state of residence on the nonexempt sale or
use of the motor vehicle.

V.  Notwithstanding
subsections A and B of this section, the tangible personal property in the
following categories is not exempt or deductible from the tax base for taxable
periods beginning from and after December 31, 2027:

1.  Subsection
A, paragraphs 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 25,
26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47,
48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 59 and 60 of this section.

2.  Subsection
B, paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19
and 20 of this section.

V.  W.  For the purposes of
this section:

1.  "Agricultural
aircraft" means an aircraft that is built for agricultural use for the
aerial application of pesticides or fertilizer or for aerial seeding.

2.  "Aircraft"
includes:

(a)  An
airplane flight simulator that is approved by the federal aviation
administration for use as a phase II or higher flight simulator under appendix
H, 14 Code of Federal Regulations part 121.

(b)  Tangible
personal property that is permanently affixed or attached as a component part
of an aircraft that is owned or operated by a certificated or licensed carrier
of persons or property.

3.  "Other
accessories and related equipment" includes aircraft accessories and
equipment such as ground service equipment that physically contact aircraft at
some point during the overall carrier operation.

4.  "Selling
at retail" means a sale for any purpose other than for resale in the regular
course of business in the form of tangible personal property, but transfer of
possession, lease and rental as used in the definition of sale mean only such
transactions as are found on investigation to be in lieu of sales as defined
without the words lease or rental.

W.  X.  For the purposes of
subsection I of this section:

1.  "Assembler"
means a person who unites or combines products, wares or articles of
manufacture so as to produce a change in form or substance without changing or
altering the component parts.

2.  "Manufacturer"
means a person who is principally engaged in the fabrication, production or
manufacture of products, wares or articles for use from raw or prepared
materials, imparting to those materials new forms, qualities, properties and
combinations.

3.  "Modifier"
means a person who reworks, changes or adds to products, wares or articles of
manufacture.

4.  "Overhead
materials" means tangible personal property, the gross proceeds of sales
or gross income derived from that would otherwise be included in the retail
classification, and that are used or consumed in the performance of a contract,
the cost of which is charged to an overhead expense account and allocated to
various contracts based on generally accepted accounting principles and
consistent with government contract accounting standards.

5.  "Repairer"
means a person who restores or renews products, wares or articles of
manufacture.

6.  "Subcontract"
means an agreement between a contractor and any person who is not an employee of
the contractor for furnishing of supplies or services that, in whole or in
part, are necessary to the performance of one or more government contracts, or
under which any portion of the contractor's obligation under one or more
government contracts is performed, undertaken or assumed and that includes
provisions causing title to overhead materials or other tangible personal
property used in the performance of the subcontract to pass to the government
or that includes provisions incorporating such title passing clauses in a
government contract into the subcontract. END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Section 42-5062, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE42-5062.  Transporting
classification

A.  The
transporting classification is comprised of the business of transporting for
hire persons, freight or property by motor vehicle, railroads or aircraft from
one point to another point in this state.  The transporting
classification does not include:

1.  Transporting
for hire persons, freight or property by:

(a)  Motor
carriers subject to a fee prescribed in title 28, chapter 16, article 4. 

(b)  Light
motor vehicles subject to a fee under title 28, chapter 15, article 4. 

(c)  Transportation
network companies subject to a fee prescribed pursuant to section 28‑9552.


(d)  Transportation
network company drivers on transactions involving transportation network
services as defined in section 28‑9551.

(e)  Vehicle
for hire companies that are issued permits pursuant to section 28‑9503. 

(f)  Vehicle
for hire drivers operating under a company permit issued pursuant to section 28‑9503
on transactions involving vehicle for hire services.

2.  The
business of transporting for hire persons traveling in air commerce by aircraft
if taxation of the business is preempted by federal law.

3.  Ambulances
or ambulance services provided under title 48 or certified pursuant to title
36, chapter 21.1 or provided by a city or town in a county with a population of
less than one hundred fifty thousand persons as determined in the most recent
United States decennial census.

4.  Public
transportation program services for the dial-a-ride programs and special needs
transportation services.

5.  Transporting
freight or property for hire by a railroad operating exclusively in this state
if the transportation comprises a portion of a single shipment of freight or
property, involving more than one railroad, either from a point in this state
to a point outside this state or from a point outside this state to a point in
this state.  For the purposes of this paragraph, "a  single shipment" means the
transportation that begins at the point at which one of the railroads first
takes possession of the freight or property and continues until the point at
which one of the railroads relinquishes possession of the freight or property
to a party other than one of the railroads.

6.  Arranging
transportation as a convenience or service to a person's customers if that person
is not otherwise engaged in the business of transporting persons, freight or
property for hire.  This exception does not apply to businesses that
dispatch vehicles pursuant to customer orders and send the billings and receive
the payments associated with that activity, including when the transportation
is performed by third‑party independent contractors.  For the
purposes of this paragraph, "arranging" includes billing for or
collecting transportation charges from a person's customers on behalf of the
persons providing the transportation.

B.  The
tax base for the transporting classification is the gross proceeds of sales or
gross income derived from the business, except that the following shall be
deducted from the tax base:

1.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from transporting for hire
persons, freight or property by a railroad pursuant to a contract with another
railroad that is also considered to be engaged in the businesses of
transporting persons, freight or property for hire if the other railroad is
liable for the tax on gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to
the transportation.

2.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from business activity that is
properly included in any other business classification under this article and
that is taxable to the person engaged in that classification, but the gross
proceeds of sales or gross income to be deducted shall not exceed the
consideration paid to the person conducting the activity.

3.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from a business activity that
is arranged by the person who is subject to tax under this section and that is
not taxable to the person conducting the activity due to an exclusion,
exemption or deduction under this section or section 42‑5073, but the
gross proceeds of sales or gross income to be deducted shall not exceed the
consideration paid to the person conducting the activity.

4.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from business activity that is
arranged by a person who is subject to tax under this section and that is
taxable to another person under this section who conducts the activity, but the
gross proceeds of sales or gross income to be deducted shall not exceed the
consideration paid to the person conducting the activity.

5.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from transporting fertilizer by
a railroad from a point in this state to another point in this state.

C.  Notwithstanding
subsections A and B of this section, the activities in the following categories
are not exempt or deductible from the tax base for taxable periods beginning
from and after December 31, 2027:

1.  Subsection
A, paragraphs 3, 4, 5 and 6 of this section.

2.  Subsection
B, paragraphs 1 and 5 of this section. END_STATUTE

Sec. 4.  Section 42-5063, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE42-5063.  Utilities
classification; definitions

A.  The
utilities classification is comprised of the business of:

1.  Producing
and furnishing or furnishing to consumers natural or artificial gas and water.

2.  Providing
to retail electric customers ancillary services, electric distribution
services, electric generation services, electric transmission services and
other services related to providing electricity.

B.  The
utilities classification does not include:

1.  Sales
of ancillary services, electric distribution services, electric generation
services, electric transmission services and other services related to
providing electricity, gas or water to a person who resells the services.

2.  Sales
of natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas used to propel a motor vehicle.

3.  Sales
of alternative fuel, as defined in section 1‑215, to a used oil fuel
burner who has received a permit to burn used oil or used oil fuel under
section 49‑426 or 49‑480.

4.  Sales
of ancillary services, electric distribution services, electric generation
services, electric transmission services and other services that are related to
providing electricity to a retail electric customer who is located outside this
state for use outside this state if the electricity is delivered to a point of
sale outside this state.

5.  Sales
or other transfers of renewable energy credits or any other unit created to
track energy derived from renewable energy resources.  For the
purposes of this paragraph, "renewable energy credit" means a unit
created administratively by the corporation commission or governing body of a
public power utility to track kilowatt hours of electricity derived from a
renewable energy resource or the kilowatt hour equivalent of conventional
energy resources displaced by distributed renewable energy resources.

6.  The
leasing or renting of space to make attachments to utility poles as follows:

(a)  By
a person that is engaged in business under this section.

(b)  To
a person that is engaged in business under this section or section 42‑5064
or that is a cable operator.

C.  The
tax base for the utilities classification is the gross proceeds of sales or
gross income derived from the business, but the following shall be deducted
from the tax base:

1.  Revenues
received by a municipally owned utility in the form of fees charged to persons
constructing residential, commercial or industrial developments or connecting
residential, commercial or industrial developments to a municipal utility
system or systems if the fees are segregated and used only for capital
expansion, system enlargement or debt service of the utility system or systems.

2.  Revenues
received by any person or persons owning a utility system in the form of
reimbursement or contribution compensation for property and equipment installed
to provide utility access to, on or across the land of an actual utility
consumer if the property and equipment become the property of the
utility.  This deduction shall not exceed the value of such property
and equipment.

3.  Gross
proceeds of sales or gross income derived from sales to:

(a)  Qualifying
hospitals as defined in section 42‑5001.

(b)  A
qualifying health care organization as defined in section 42‑5001 if
the tangible personal property is used by the organization solely to provide
health and medical related educational and charitable services.

4.  The
portion of gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from sales
to a qualified environmental technology manufacturer, producer or processor as
defined in section 41‑1514.02 of a utility product and that is used
directly in environmental technology manufacturing, producing or
processing.  This paragraph shall apply for twenty full consecutive
calendar or fiscal years from the date the first paper manufacturing machine is
placed in service.  In the case of a qualified environmental technology
manufacturer, producer or processor who does not manufacture paper, the time
period shall begin with the date the first manufacturing, processing or
production equipment is placed in service.

5.  The
portion of gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to transfers of
electricity by any retail electric customer owning a solar photovoltaic energy
generating system to an electric distribution system, if the electricity
transferred is generated by the customer's system.

6.  Gross
proceeds of sales or gross income derived from sales of electricity, natural
gas or liquefied petroleum gas to a qualified manufacturing or smelting
business.  A utility that claims this deduction shall report each
month, on a form prescribed by the department, the name and address of each
qualified manufacturing or smelting business for which this deduction is
taken.  This paragraph applies to gas transportation
services.  For the purposes of this paragraph:

(a)  "Gas
transportation services" means the services of transporting natural gas to
a natural gas customer or to a natural gas distribution facility if the natural
gas was purchased from a supplier other than the utility.

(b)  "Manufacturing"
means the performance as a business of an integrated series of operations that
places tangible personal property in a form, composition or character different
from that in which it was acquired and transforms it into a different product
with a distinctive name, character or use.  Manufacturing does not
include job printing, publishing, packaging, mining, generating electricity or
operating a restaurant.

(c)  "Qualified
manufacturing or smelting business" means one of the following:

(i)  A
business that manufactures or smelts tangible products in this state, of which
at least fifty-one percent of the manufactured or smelted products will be
exported out of state for incorporation into another product or sold out of
state for a final sale.

(ii)  A
business that derives at least fifty‑one percent of its gross income from
the sale of manufactured or smelted products manufactured or smelted by the
business.

(iii)  A
business that uses at least fifty‑one percent of its square footage in
this state for manufacturing or smelting and business activities directly
related to manufacturing or smelting.

(iv)  A
business that employs at least fifty-one percent of its workforce in this state
in manufacturing or smelting and business activities directly related to
manufacturing or smelting.

(v)  A
business that uses at least fifty-one percent of the value of its capitalized
assets in this state, as reflected on the business's books and records, for
manufacturing or smelting and business activities directly related to
manufacturing or smelting.

(d)  "Smelting"
means to melt or fuse a metalliferous mineral, often with an accompanying
chemical change, usually to separate the metal.

7.  Gross
proceeds of sales or gross income derived from sales of electricity or natural
gas to a business that operates an international operations center in this
state and that is certified by the Arizona commerce authority pursuant to
section 41‑1520.

D.  Notwithstanding
subsections B and C of this section, the activities in the following categories
are not exempt or deductible from the tax base for taxable periods beginning
from and after December 31, 2027:

1.  Subsection
B, paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 of this section.

2.  Subsection
C, paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 of this section.

D.  E.  For the purposes of
this section:

1.  "Ancillary
services" means those services so designated in federal energy regulatory
commission order 888 adopted in 1996 that include the services necessary to
support the transmission of electricity from resources to loads while
maintaining reliable operation of the transmission system according to good
utility practice.

2.  "Cable
operator" has the same meaning prescribed in section 9‑505.

3.  "Electric
distribution service" means distributing electricity to retail electric
customers through the use of electric distribution facilities.

4.  "Electric
generation service" means providing electricity for sale to retail
electric customers but excluding electric distribution or transmission
services.

5.  "Electric
transmission service" means transmitting electricity to retail electric
customers or to electric distribution facilities so classified by the federal
energy regulatory commission or, to the extent permitted by law, so classified
by the Arizona corporation commission.

6.  "Other
services" includes metering, meter reading services, billing and collecting
services.

7.  "Retail
electric customer" means a person who purchases electricity for that
person's own use, including use in that person's trade or business and not for
resale, redistribution or retransmission.

8.  "Utility
pole" means any wooden, metal or other pole used for utility purposes and
the pole's appurtenances that are attached or authorized for attachment by the
person controlling the pole. END_STATUTE

Sec. 5.  Section 42-5064, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE42-5064.  Telecommunications
classification; definitions

A.  The
telecommunications classification is comprised of the business of providing
intrastate telecommunications services.  The telecommunications
classification does not include:

1.  Sales
of intrastate telecommunications services by a cable operator or by a microwave
television transmission system that transmits television programming to
multiple subscribers and that is operated pursuant to 47 Code of Federal
Regulations parts 21 and 74.

2.  Sales
of internet access or application services to the person's subscribers and
customers.  For the purposes of this paragraph:

(a)  "Application
services" means software applications provided remotely using hypertext
transfer protocol or another network protocol and purchased by or for any
school district, charter school, community college or state university to
assess or test student learning or to promote curriculum design or enhancement.

(b)  "Curriculum
design or enhancement" means planning, implementing or reporting on
courses of study, lessons, assignments or other learning activities.

3.  The
leasing or renting of space to make attachments to utility poles as follows:

(a)  By
a person that is engaged in business under this section.

(b)  To
a person that is engaged in business under section 42-5063 or this section or
that is a cable operator.

B.  The
tax base for the telecommunications classification is the gross proceeds of
sales or gross income derived from the business, including the gross income
derived from tolls, subscriptions and services on behalf of subscribers or from
the publication of a directory of the names of subscribers.  However,
the gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from the following shall be
deducted from the tax base:

1.  Sales
of intrastate telecommunications services to:

(a)  Other
persons engaged in businesses classified under the telecommunications
classification for use in such business.

(b)  A
direct broadcast satellite television or data transmission service that
operates pursuant to 47 Code of Federal Regulations part 25 for use in its
direct broadcast satellite television or data transmission operation by a
facility described in section 42‑5061, subsection B, paragraph 15,
subdivision (b).

2.  End
user common line charges established by federal communications commission
regulations (47 Code of Federal Regulations section 69.104(a)).

3.  Carrier
access charges established by federal communications commission regulations (47
Code of Federal Regulations sections 69.105(a) through 69.118).

4.  Sales
of direct broadcast satellite television services pursuant to 47 Code of
Federal Regulations part 25 by a direct broadcast satellite television service
that operates pursuant to 47 Code of Federal Regulations part 25.

5.  Telecommunications
services purchased with a prepaid calling card, or a prepaid authorization
number for telecommunications services, that is taxable under section 42‑5061.

C.  A
person that is engaged in a transient lodging business subject to taxation
under section 42‑5070 and that provides telephone, fax or internet access
services to its customers at an additional charge, which is separately stated
on the customer invoice, is considered to be engaged in business subject to
taxation under this section for the purposes of taxing the gross proceeds of
sales or gross income derived from providing those services.

D.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from a bundled transaction of
services that are taxable pursuant to section 42‑5023 are subject to
the following: 

1.  A
telecommunications service provider who can reasonably identify the portion of
the sales price of the bundled transaction derived from charges for nontaxable
services is subject to tax only on the gross proceeds of sales or gross income
derived from the taxable services.  For the purposes of this section,
the telecommunications service provider may elect to reasonably identify the portion
of the sales price of the bundled transaction derived from charges for
nontaxable services by using allocation percentages derived from the
telecommunications service provider's entire service area, including
territories outside of this state.  On request, the department may
require the telecommunications service provider to provide this allocation
information.  The reasonableness of the allocation is subject to
audit by the department. 

2.  Notwithstanding
sections 42‑1118, 42‑1120 and 42‑1121, the telecommunications
service provider shall waive the right to file a claim for a refund of taxes
paid on the bundled transaction if the taxes paid are based on the allocation
percentage the telecommunications service provider had determined to be reasonable
at the beginning of the tax period at issue.

3.  The
burden of proof is on the telecommunications service provider to establish that
the gross proceeds of sales or gross income is derived from charges for
nontaxable services.

E.  Notwithstanding
subsections A and B of this section, the activities in the following categories
are not exempt or deductible from the tax base for taxable periods beginning
from and after December 31, 2027:

1.  Subsection
A, paragraphs 1 and 2 of this section.

2.  Subsection
B, paragraphs 2 and 4 of this section.

E.  F.  For the purposes of
this section:

1.  "Bundled
transaction" means a sale of multiple services in which both of the
following apply: 

(a)  The
sale consists of both taxable and nontaxable services.

(b)  The
telecommunications service provider charges a customer one sales price for all
services that are sold instead of separately charging for each individual
service.

2.  "Cable
operator" has the same meaning prescribed in section 9‑505.

3.  "Internet"
means the computer and telecommunications facilities that comprise the
interconnected worldwide network of networks that employ the transmission
control protocol or internet protocol, or any predecessor or successor
protocol, to communicate information of all kinds by wire or radio.

4.  "Internet
access" means a service that enables users to access content, information,
electronic
mail e-mail or other services over the
internet.  Internet access does not include telecommunications
services provided by a common carrier.

5.  "Intrastate
telecommunications services" means transmitting signs, signals, writings,
images, sounds, messages, data or other information of any nature by wire,
radio waves, light waves or other electromagnetic means if the information
transmitted originates and terminates in this state.

6.  "Utility
pole" means any wooden, metal or other pole used for utility purposes and
the pole's appurtenances that are attached or authorized for attachment by the
person controlling the pole. END_STATUTE

Sec. 6.  Section 42-5065, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE42-5065.  Publication
classification; definition

A.  The
publication classification is comprised of the business of publishing
newspapers, magazines or other periodicals and publications if published in
this state.  The publication classification does not include:

1.  Manufacturing
or publishing books.

2.  Sales
of magazines or other periodicals or other publications by this state to
encourage tourist travel.

B.  The
tax base for the publication classification is the gross proceeds of sales or
gross income derived from the business, including the gross income derived from
notices and subscription income, but the following shall be deducted from the
tax base:

1.  Gross
income derived from advertising.

2.  Gross
proceeds of sales or gross income derived from sales of personal property to:

(a)  Qualifying
hospitals as defined in section 42‑5001.

(b)  A
qualifying health care organization as defined in section 42‑5001 if
the tangible personal property is used by the organization solely to provide
health and medical related educational and charitable services.

(c)  A
qualifying health sciences educational institution as defined in section 42‑5001.

C.  Notwithstanding
subsections A and B of this section, the activities in the following categories
are not exempt or deductible from the tax base for taxable periods beginning
from and after December 31, 2027:

1.  Subsection
A, paragraph 1 of this section.

2.  Subsection
B, paragraph 1 of this section.

C.  D.  For purposes of this
section, "subscription income"
includes all circulation revenue, except amounts actually retained by or
credited to carriers and other vendors as compensation for sale or delivery of
publications and revenue from publications sold, directly or through wholesalers
or jobbers, to retailers for resale. END_STATUTE

Sec. 7.  Section 42-5066, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE42-5066.  Job
printing classification

A.  The
job printing classification is comprised of the business of job printing,
engraving, embossing and copying.

B.  The
tax base for the job printing classification is the gross proceeds of sales or
gross income derived from the business, but the gross proceeds of sales or
gross income derived from the following shall be deducted from the tax base:

1.  Sales
to a person in this state who has a transaction privilege tax license issued in
this state,  and who does either of the
following:

(a)  Resells
the job printing, engraving, embossing or copying.

(b)  Distributes
such printing, engraving, embossing or copying without consideration in
connection with the publication of a newspaper or magazine.

2.  Sales
of job printing, engraving, embossing and copying for use outside this state if
the materials are shipped or delivered out of this state regardless of where
title to the materials passes or their free on board point.

3.  Sales
of personal property to:

(a)  Qualifying
hospitals as defined in section 42‑5001.

(b)  A
qualifying health care organization as defined in section 42‑5001 if
the tangible personal property is used by the organization solely to provide
health and medical related educational and charitable services.

(c)  A
qualifying health sciences educational institution as defined in section 42‑5001.

4.  Sales
of postage and freight except that the amount deducted shall not exceed the
actual postage and freight expense that is paid to the United States postal
service or a commercial delivery service and that is separately itemized by the
taxpayer on the customer's invoice and in the taxpayer's records.

C.  Notwithstanding
subsection B of this section, the activities described in subsection B,
paragraphs 1, 2 and 4 of this section are not deductible from the tax base for
taxable periods beginning from and after December 31, 2027. END_STATUTE

Sec. 8.  Section 42-5070, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE42-5070.  Transient
lodging classification; definition

A.  The
transient lodging classification is comprised of the business of operating, for
occupancy by transients, a hotel or motel, including an inn, tourist home or
house, dude ranch, resort, campground, studio or bachelor hotel, lodging house,
rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home
or house trailer at a fixed location or other similar structure, and also
including a space, lot or slab that is occupied or intended or designed for
occupancy by transients in a mobile home or house trailer furnished by them for
such occupancy.

B.  The
transient lodging classification does not include:

1.  Operating
a convalescent home or facility, home for the aged, hospital, jail, military
installation or fraternity or sorority house or operating any structure
exclusively by an association, institution, governmental agency or corporation
for religious, charitable or educational purposes, if no part of the net earnings
of the association, corporation or other entity inures to the benefit of any
private shareholder or individual.

2.  A
lease or rental of a mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location or any
other similar structure, and also including a space, lot or slab that is
occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients in a mobile home
or house trailer furnished by them for such occupancy for thirty or more
consecutive days.

3.  Leasing
or renting four or fewer rooms of an owner‑occupied residential home,
together with furnishing no more than a breakfast meal, to transient lodgers at
no more than a fifty percent average annual occupancy rate.  This exemption
expires from and after December 31, 2027.

4.  The
activities of any online lodging marketplace, as defined in section 42‑5076.

C.  The
tax base for the transient lodging classification is the gross proceeds of
sales or gross income derived from the business, except that the tax base does
not include:

1.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from business activity that is
properly included in another business classification under this article and
that is taxable to the person engaged in that business classification, but the
gross proceeds of sales or gross income to be deducted shall not exceed the
consideration paid to the person conducting the activity.

2.  The
gross proceeds or gross income received by an online lodging operator, as
defined in section 42‑5076, from any online lodging transactions, as
defined in section 42‑5076, for which the online lodging operator has
received documentation from a registered online lodging marketplace, as defined
in section 42‑5076, pursuant to section 42‑5009, subsection P that
the online lodging marketplace has remitted or will remit the applicable tax to
the department pursuant to section 42‑5014, subsection E.

D.  For
the purposes of this section, the tax base for the transient lodging
classification does not include gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived
from:

1.  Transactions
or activities that are not limited to transients and that would not be taxable
if engaged in by a person not subject to tax under this article.

2.  Transactions
or activities that are not limited to transients and that would not be taxable
if engaged in by a person subject to taxation under section 42‑5062 or 42‑5073
due to an exclusion, exemption or deduction.

3.  Commissions
paid to a person that is engaged in transient lodging business subject to
taxation under this section by a person providing services or property to the
customers of the person engaging in the transient lodging business.

E.  The
department shall separately account for revenues collected under the transient
lodging classification for the purposes of section 42‑5029,
subsection D, paragraph 4, subdivision (b).

F.  For
the purposes of this section, "transient" means any person who either
at the person's own expense or at the expense of another obtains lodging space
or the use of lodging space on a daily or weekly basis, or on any other basis
for less than thirty consecutive days. END_STATUTE

Sec. 9.  Section 42-5071, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE42-5071.  Personal
property rental classification; definitions

A.  The
personal property rental classification is comprised of the business of leasing
or renting tangible personal property for a consideration.  The tax
does not apply to:

1.  Leasing
or renting films, tapes or slides used by theaters or movies, which are engaged
in business under the amusement classification, or used by television stations
or radio stations.

2.  Activities
engaged in by the Arizona exposition and state fair board or county fair
commissions in connection with events sponsored by such entities.

3.  Leasing
or renting tangible personal property by a parent corporation to a subsidiary
corporation or by a subsidiary corporation to another subsidiary of the same
parent corporation if taxes were paid under this chapter on the gross proceeds
or gross income accruing from the initial sale of the tangible personal
property.  For the purposes of this paragraph, "subsidiary"
means a corporation of which at least eighty percent of the voting shares are
owned by the parent corporation.

4.  Operating
coin‑operated washing, drying and dry cleaning machines or coin‑operated
car washing machines at establishments for the use of such machines.

5.  Leasing
or renting tangible personal property for incorporation into or comprising any
part of a qualified environmental technology facility as described in section
41‑1514.02.  This paragraph shall apply for ten full
consecutive calendar or fiscal years following the initial lease or rental by
each qualified environmental technology manufacturer, producer or processor.

6.  Leasing
or renting aircraft, flight simulators or similar training equipment to
students or staff by nonprofit, accredited educational institutions that offer
associate or baccalaureate degrees in aviation or aerospace related fields.

7.  Leasing
or renting photographs, transparencies or other creative works used by this
state on internet websites, in magazines or in other publications that
encourage tourism.

8.  Leasing
or renting certified ignition interlock devices installed pursuant to the
requirements prescribed by section 28‑1461.  For the purposes
of this paragraph, "certified ignition interlock device" has the same
meaning prescribed in section 28‑1301.

9.  The
leasing or renting of space to make attachments to utility poles, as follows:

(a)  By
a person that is engaged in business under section 42‑5063 or 42‑5064
or that is a cable operator.

(b)  To
a person that is engaged in business under section 42‑5063 or 42‑5064
or that is a cable operator.

10.  Leasing
or renting billboards that are designed, intended or used to advertise or
inform and that are visible from any street, road or other highway.

B.  The
tax base for the personal property rental classification is the gross proceeds
of sales or gross income derived from the business, but the gross proceeds of
sales or gross income derived from the following shall be deducted from the tax
base:

1.  Reimbursements
by the lessee to the lessor of a motor vehicle for payments by the lessor of
the applicable fees and taxes imposed by sections 28‑2003, 28‑2352,
28‑2402, 28‑2481 and 28‑5801, title 28, chapter 15,
article 2 and article IX, section 11, Constitution of Arizona, to the
extent such amounts are separately identified as such fees and taxes and are
billed to the lessee.

2.  Leases
or rentals of tangible personal property that, if it had been purchased instead
of leased or rented by the lessee, would have been exempt under:

(a)  Section
42‑5061, subsection A, paragraph 8, 9, 12, 13, 25, 29, 49 or 53. 

(b)  Section
42‑5061, subsection B, except that a lease or rental of new machinery or
equipment is not exempt pursuant to section 42‑5061, subsection B,
paragraph 13 if the lease is for less than two years.

(c)  Section
42‑5061, subsection I, paragraph 1.

(d)  Section
42‑5061, subsection M.

3.  Motor
vehicle fuel and use fuel that are subject to a tax imposed under title 28,
chapter 16, article 1, sales of use fuel to a holder of a valid single trip use
fuel tax permit issued under section 28‑5739 and sales of aviation
fuel that are subject to the tax imposed under section 28‑8344.

4.  Leasing
or renting a motor vehicle subject to and on which the fee has been paid under
title 28, chapter 16, article 4.

5.  Amounts
received by a motor vehicle dealer for the first month of a lease payment if
the lease and the lease payment for the first month of the lease are
transferred to a third‑party leasing company.

C.  Sales
of tangible personal property to be leased or rented to a person engaged in a
business classified under the personal property rental classification are
deemed to be resale sales.

D.  In
computing the tax base, the gross proceeds of sales or gross income from the
lease or rental of a motor vehicle does not include any amount attributable to
the car rental surcharge under section 5‑839, 28‑5810 or 48‑4234.

E.  Until
December 31, 1988, leasing or renting animals for recreational purposes is
exempt from the tax imposed by this section. Beginning January 1, 1989, the
gross proceeds or gross income from leasing or renting animals for recreational
purposes is subject to taxation under this section.  Tax liabilities,
penalties and interest paid for taxable periods before January 1, 1989 shall
not be refunded unless the taxpayer requesting the refund provides proof
satisfactory to the department that the monies paid as taxes will be returned
to the customer.

F.  Notwithstanding
subsections A and B of this section, the activities in the following categories
are not exempt or deductible from the tax base for taxable periods beginning
from and after December 31, 2027:

1.  Subsection
A, paragraphs 1, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 10 of this section.

2.  Subsection
B, paragraph 5 of this section.

F.  G.  For the purposes of
this section:

1.  "Cable
operator" has the same meaning prescribed by in section 9‑505.

2.  "Utility
pole" means any wooden, metal or other pole used for utility purposes and
the pole's appurtenances that are attached or authorized for attachment by the
person controlling the pole. END_STATUTE

Sec. 10.  Section 42-5072, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE42-5072.  Mining
classification; definition

A.  The
mining classification is comprised of the business of mining, quarrying or
producing for sale, profit or commercial use any nonmetalliferous mineral
product that has been mined, quarried or otherwise extracted within the
boundaries of this state described in article I, section 1, Constitution of
Arizona.

B.  The
tax base for the mining classification is the gross proceeds of sales or gross
income derived from the business.  The gross proceeds of sales or
gross income derived from sales described under section 42‑5061,
subsection A, paragraph 27 and subsection I, paragraph 2 shall be deducted from
the tax base.

C.  The
tax base includes the value of the entire product mined, quarried or produced
for sale, profit or commercial use in this state, regardless of the place of
sale of the product or of the fact that deliveries may be made to points
without this state.  Through December 31, 2027, if, however, the sale price of the product
includes freight, the sale price shall be reduced by the actual freight paid by
any person from the place of production to the place of delivery.

D.  In
the case of a person who
is engaged in
business classified under the mining classification and all or part of whose income is
derived from service or manufacturing charges instead of from sales of the
products manufactured or handled, the tax base includes the gross income of the
person derived from the service or manufacturing charge.

E.  If
a person engaging in business classified under the mining classification ships
or transports all or part of a product out of this state without making sale of
the product or ships his the product outside of this state in
an unfinished condition, the value of the product or article in the condition
or form in which it existed when transported out of this state and before it
enters interstate commerce is included in the tax base, and the department
shall prescribe equitable and uniform rules for ascertaining that
value.  In determining the tax base, if the product or any part of
the product has been processed in this state and the proceeds of such
processing have been included in the tax base of the processor under this
chapter, the person may deduct from the value of the product when transported
out of this state the cost of such processing.

F.  A
person who conducts a business classified under the mining classification may
be deemed also to be engaged in business classified under the retail
classification to the extent the person's activities comprise business under
the retail classification if the tax is paid at the rate imposed on the retail
classification by section 42‑5010.  If the transaction is not
subject to taxation under the retail classification, the transaction shall be
included in the tax base under this section, except for the transfer of title
or possession of coal back and forth between an owner or operator of a power
plant and a person who is responsible for refining coal if both of the
following apply:

1.  The
transfer of title or possession of the coal is for the purpose of refining the
coal.

2.  The
title or possession of the coal is transferred back to the owner or operator of
the power plant after completion of the coal refining process.  For
the purposes of this paragraph, "coal refining process" means the
application of a coal additive system that aids the reduction of power plant
emissions during the combustion of coal and the treatment of flue gas.

G.  For
the purposes of this section, "nonmetalliferous mineral product"
means oil, natural gas, limestone, sand, gravel or any other nonmetalliferous
mineral product, compound or combination of nonmetalliferous mineral products. END_STATUTE

Sec. 11.  Section 42-5073, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE42-5073.  Amusement
classification

A.  The
amusement classification is comprised of the business of operating or
conducting theaters, movies, operas, shows of any type or nature, exhibitions,
concerts, carnivals, circuses, amusement parks, menageries, fairs, races,
contests, games, billiard or pool parlors, bowling alleys, public dances, dance
halls, boxing and wrestling matches, skating rinks, tennis courts, except as
provided in subsection B of this section, video games, pinball machines,  or sports events or any other
business charging admission or user fees for exhibition, amusement or
entertainment, including the operation or sponsorship of events by a tourism
and sports authority under title 5, chapter 8.  For the purposes of
this section, admission or user fees include, but are not limited to, any
revenues derived from any form of contractual agreement for rights to or use of
premium or special seating facilities or arrangements.  The amusement
classification does not include:

1.  Activities
or projects of bona fide religious or educational institutions.

2.  Private
or group instructional activities.  For the purposes of this
paragraph, "private or group instructional activities" includes, but
is not limited to, performing arts, martial arts, gymnastics and aerobic
instruction.

3.  The
operation or sponsorship of events by the Arizona exposition and state fair
board or county fair commissions.

4.  A
musical, dramatic or dance group or a botanical garden, museum or zoo that is
qualified as a nonprofit charitable organization under section 501(c)(3) of the
United States internal revenue code and if no part of its net income
inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.

5.  Exhibition
events in this state that
are sponsored,
conducted or operated by a nonprofit organization that is exempt from taxation
under section 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4) or 501(c)(6) of the internal revenue code if
the organization is associated with major league baseball teams or a national
touring professional golfing association and no part of the organization's net
earnings inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.

6.  Operating
or sponsoring rodeos that feature primarily farm and ranch animals in this
state and that are sponsored, conducted or operated by a nonprofit organization
that is exempt from taxation under section 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4), 501(c)(6),
501(c)(7) or 501(c)(8) of the internal revenue code and if no part of the organization's net
earnings inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.

7.  Sales
of admissions to intercollegiate football contests if the contests are both:

(a)  Operated
by a nonprofit organization that is exempt from taxation under section
501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code and no part of the organization's net
earnings inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.

(b)  Not
held in a multipurpose facility that is owned or operated by the tourism and
sports authority pursuant to title 5, chapter 8.

8.  Activities
and events of, or fees and assessments received by, a homeowners organization
from persons who are members of the organization or accompanied guests of
members.  For the purposes of this paragraph, "homeowners
organization" means a mandatory membership organization that is comprised of owners of
residential property within a specified residential real estate subdivision
development or similar area,
and that is established to own property for
the benefit of its members where and to which both of the following apply:

(a)  No
part of the organization's net earnings inures to the benefit of any private
shareholder or individual.

(b)  The
primary purpose of the organization is to provide for the acquisition,
construction, management, maintenance or care of organization property.

9.  Activities
and events of, or fees received by, a nonprofit organization that is exempt
from taxation under section 501(c)(6) of the internal revenue code if the
organization produces, organizes or promotes cultural or civic related
festivals or events and no part of the organization's net earnings inures to
the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.

10.  Arranging
an amusement activity as a service to a person's customers if that person is
not otherwise engaged in the business of operating or conducting an amusement
personally or through others.  This exception does not apply to
businesses that operate or conduct amusements pursuant to customer orders and
send the billings and receive the payments associated with that activity,
including when the amusement is performed by third-party independent
contractors.  For the purposes of this paragraph,
"arranging" includes billing for or collecting amusement charges from
a person's customers on behalf of the persons providing the amusement.

B.  The
tax base for the amusement classification is the gross proceeds of sales or
gross income derived from the business, except that the following shall be
deducted from the tax base:

1.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from memberships, including initiation
fees, that provide for the right to use a health or fitness establishment or a
private recreational establishment, or any portion of an establishment,
including tennis and other racquet courts at that establishment, for
participatory purposes for twenty‑eight days or more and fees charged for
use of the health or fitness establishment or private recreational
establishment by bona fide accompanied guests of members, except that this
paragraph does not include additional fees, other than initiation fees, charged
by a health or fitness establishment or a private recreational establishment
for purposes other than memberships which that provide for the right to use a
health or fitness establishment or private recreational establishment, or any
portion of an establishment, for participatory purposes for twenty‑eight
days or more and accompanied guest use fees.

2.  Amounts
that are exempt under section 5‑111, subsection H.

3.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from membership fees, including
initiation fees, that provide for the right to use a transient lodging
recreational establishment, including golf courses and tennis and other racquet
courts at that establishment, for participatory purposes for twenty‑eight
days or more, except that this paragraph does not include additional fees,
other than initiation fees, that are charged by a transient lodging
recreational establishment for purposes other than memberships and that provide
for the right to use a transient lodging recreational establishment or any
portion of the establishment for participatory purposes for twenty‑eight
days or more.

4.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from sales to persons engaged
in the business of transient lodging classified under section 42‑5070, if
all of the following apply:

(a)  The
persons who are engaged in the transient lodging business sell the amusement to
another person for consideration.

(b)  The
consideration received by the transient lodging business is equal to or greater
than the amount to be deducted under this subsection.

(c)  The
transient lodging business has provided an exemption certificate to the person
engaging in business under this section.

5.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from:

(a)  Business
activity that is properly included in any other business classification under
this article and that is taxable to the person engaged in that classification,
but the gross proceeds of sales or gross income to be deducted shall not exceed
the consideration paid to the person conducting the activity.

(b)  Business
activity that is arranged by the person who is subject to tax under this
section and that is not taxable to the person conducting the activity due to an
exclusion, exemption or deduction under this section or section 42‑5062,
but the gross proceeds of sales or gross income to be deducted shall not exceed
the consideration paid to the person conducting the activity.

(c)  Business
activity that is arranged by a person who is subject to tax under this section and
that is taxable to another person under this section who conducts the activity,
but the gross proceeds of sales or gross income to be deducted shall not exceed
the consideration paid to the person conducting the activity.

6.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from entry fees paid by
participants for events that either:

(a)  Until
March 1, 2017, consist of a run, walk, swim or bicycle ride or a similar event,
or any combination of these events.

(b)  Are
operated or conducted by nonprofit organizations that are exempt from taxation
under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code and of which no part of
the organization's net earnings inures to the benefit of any private
shareholder or individual, if the event consists of a run, walk, swim or
bicycle ride or a similar event, or any combination of these events.

C.  For
the purposes of subsection B of this section:

1.  "Health
or fitness establishment" means a facility whose primary purpose is to
provide facilities, equipment, instruction or education to promote the health
and fitness of its members and where at
least eighty percent of the monthly gross revenue of the facility is received
through accounts of memberships and accompanied guest use fees which that provide for the right to use the
facility, or any portion of the facility, under the terms of the membership
agreement for participatory purposes for twenty‑eight days or more.

2.  "Private
recreational establishment" means a facility whose primary purpose is to
provide recreational facilities, such as tennis, golf and swimming, for its
members and where at least eighty percent of the monthly gross revenue of the
facility is received through accounts of memberships and accompanied guest use
fees which that provide for the right to use the
facility, or any portion of the facility, for participatory purposes for twenty‑eight
days or more.

3.  "Transient
lodging recreational establishment" means a facility whose primary purpose
is to provide facilities for transient lodging, that is subject to taxation
under this chapter and that also provides recreational facilities, such as
tennis, golf and swimming, for members for a period of twenty‑eight days
or more.

D.  Until
December 31, 1988, the revenues from hayrides and other animal‑drawn
amusement rides, from horseback riding and riding instruction and from
recreational tours using motor vehicles designed to operate on and off public
highways are exempt from the tax imposed by this section.  Beginning January 1,
1989, the gross proceeds or gross income from hayrides and other animal‑drawn
amusement rides, from horseback riding and from recreational tours using motor
vehicles designed to operate on and off public highways are subject to taxation
under this section.  Tax liabilities, penalties and interest paid for
taxable periods before January 1, 1989 shall not be refunded unless the
taxpayer requesting the refund provides proof satisfactory to the department
that the taxes will be returned to the customer.

E.  If
a person is engaged in the business of offering both exhibition, amusement or
entertainment and private or group instructional activities, the person's books
shall be kept to show separately the gross income from exhibition, amusement or
entertainment and the gross income from instructional activities.  If
the books do not provide this separate accounting, the tax is imposed on the
person's total gross income from the business.

F.  The
department shall separately account for revenues collected under the amusement
classification for the purposes of section 42‑5029, subsection D,
paragraph 4, subdivision (b).

G.  For
the purposes of section 42‑5032.01, the department shall separately account
for revenues collected under the amusement classification from sales of
admissions to:

1.  Events
that are held in a multipurpose facility that is owned or operated by the
tourism and sports authority pursuant to title 5, chapter 8, including
intercollegiate football contests that are operated by a nonprofit organization
that is exempt from taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue
code.

2.  Professional
football contests that are held in a stadium located on the campus of an
institution under the jurisdiction of the Arizona board of regents.

H.  Notwithstanding
subsection A of this section, the activities described in subsection A,
paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8 and 10 are not exempt for taxable periods beginning
from and after December 31, 2027.
END_STATUTE

Sec. 12.  Section 42-5074, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE42-5074.  Restaurant
classification

A.  The
restaurant classification is comprised of the business of operating
restaurants, dining cars, dining rooms, lunchrooms, lunch stands, soda
fountains, catering services or similar establishments where articles of food
or drink are sold for consumption on or off the premises.

B.  The
tax base for the restaurant classification is the gross proceeds of sales or
gross income derived from the business.  The gross proceeds of sales
or gross income derived from the following shall be deducted from the tax base:

1.  Sales
to a person engaged in business classified under the restaurant classification
if the items sold are to be resold in the regular course of the business.

2.  Sales
by a congressionally chartered veterans organization of food or drink prepared
for consumption on the premises leased, owned or maintained by the
organization.

3.  Sales
by churches, fraternal benefit societies and other nonprofit organizations, as
these organizations are defined in the federal internal revenue code (26 United
States Code section 501), that do not regularly engage or continue in the
restaurant business for the purpose of fund‑raising.

4.  Sales
by a nonprofit organization that is exempt from taxation under section
501(c)(3), 501(c)(4) or 501(c)(6) of the internal revenue code if the organization
is associated with a major league baseball team or a national touring
professional golfing association and no part of the organization's net earnings
inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.

5.  Sales
at a rodeo featuring primarily farm and ranch animals in this state by a
nonprofit organization that is exempt from taxation under section 501(c)(3),
501(c)(4), 501(c)(6), 501(c)(7) or 501(c)(8) of the internal revenue code and if no part of the organization's net
earnings inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.

6.  Sales
by any nonprofit organization organized and operated exclusively for charitable
purposes and recognized by the United States internal revenue service under
section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code.

7.  Sales
to qualifying hospitals as defined in section 42‑5001.

8.  Sales
to a qualifying health care organization as defined in section 42‑5001 if
the tangible personal property is used by the organization solely to provide
health and medical related educational and charitable services.

9.  Sales
of food, drink and condiment for consumption within the premises of any prison,
jail or other institution under the jurisdiction of the state department of
corrections, the department of public safety, the department of juvenile
corrections or a county sheriff.

10.  Sales
of articles of prepared or unprepared food, drink or condiment and accessory
tangible personal property to a school district or charter school if the
articles and accessory tangible personal property are served to persons for
consumption on the premises of a public school in the school district or
charter school during school hours.

11.  Prepared
food, drink or condiment donated by a restaurant to a nonprofit charitable
organization that has qualified under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue
code and that regularly serves meals to the needy and indigent on a continuing
basis at no cost.

12.  Sales
of articles of food and drink at low or reduced prices to eligible elderly, disabled or homeless persons or persons with a
disability by
a restaurant that contracts with the department of economic security and that
is approved by the food and nutrition services of the United States department
of agriculture pursuant to the supplemental nutrition assistance program
established by the food and nutrition act of 2008 (P.L. 110-246; 122 Stat.
1651; 7 United States Code sections 2011 through 2036a), if the purchases of
the articles of food and drink are made with the benefits issued pursuant to
the supplemental nutrition assistance program.

C.  The
tax imposed on the restaurant classification pursuant to this section does not
apply to the gross proceeds of sales or gross income from tangible personal
property sold to a commercial airline consisting of food, beverages and
condiments and accessories used for serving the food and beverages, if those
items are to be provided without additional charge to passengers for
consumption in flight.  For the purposes of this subsection, "commercial
airline" means a person holding a federal certificate of public
convenience and necessity or foreign air carrier permit for air transportation
to transport persons, property or United States mail in intrastate, interstate
or foreign commerce.

D.  The
department shall separately account for revenues collected under the restaurant
classification for the purposes of section 42-5029, subsection D, paragraph 4,
subdivision (b).

E.  For
the purposes of section 42‑5032.01,
the department shall separately account for revenues collected under the
restaurant classification from businesses operating restaurants, dining rooms,
lunchrooms, lunch stands, soda fountains, catering services or similar
establishments:

1.  On
the premises of a multipurpose facility that is owned or operated by the
tourism and sports authority pursuant to title 5, chapter 8 for
consumption on or off the premises.

2.  At
professional football contests that are held in a stadium located on the campus
of an institution under the jurisdiction of the Arizona board of regents.

F.  Notwithstanding
subsection B of this section, the activities described in subsection B,
paragraphs 2, 3 and 7 are not deductible in computing the tax base for taxable
periods beginning from and after December 31, 2027. END_STATUTE

Sec. 13.  Section 42-5075, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE42-5075.  Prime
contracting classification; exemptions; definitions

A.  The
prime contracting classification is comprised of the business of prime
contracting and the business of manufactured building dealer.  Sales
for resale to another manufactured building dealer are not subject to tax.
Sales for resale do not include sales to a lessor of manufactured buildings.
The sale of a used manufactured building is not taxable under this
chapter.  

B.  Through December
31, 2027, the
tax base for the prime contracting classification is sixty‑five percent
of the gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from the
business.  For
taxable periods beginning from and after December 31, 2027, the tax base for
the prime contracting classification is the gross proceeds of sales or gross
income derived from the business.  The following amounts shall be
deducted from the gross proceeds of sales or gross income before computing the
tax base:

1.  The
sales price of land, which shall not exceed the fair market value.

2.  Sales
and installation of groundwater measuring devices required under section 45‑604
and groundwater monitoring wells required by law, including monitoring wells
installed for acquiring information for a permit required by law.

3.  The
sales price of furniture, furnishings, fixtures, appliances and attachments
that are not incorporated as component parts of or attached to a manufactured
building or the setup site.  The sale of such items may be subject to the taxes
imposed by article 1 of this chapter separately and distinctly from the sale of
the manufactured building.

4.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income received from a contract entered into
for the modification of any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation,
manufactured building or other structure, project, development or improvement
located in a military reuse zone for providing aviation or aerospace services
or for a manufacturer, assembler or fabricator of aviation or aerospace
products within an active military reuse zone after the zone is initially
established or renewed under section 41‑1531.  To be eligible to
qualify for this deduction, before beginning work under the contract, the prime
contractor must have applied for a letter of qualification from the department
of revenue.

5.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from a contract to construct a
qualified environmental technology manufacturing, producing or processing
facility, as described in section 41‑1514.02, and from subsequent
construction and installation contracts that begin within ten years after the
start of initial construction.  To qualify for this deduction, before
beginning work under the contract, the prime contractor must obtain a letter of
qualification from the department of revenue.  This paragraph shall
apply for ten full consecutive calendar or fiscal years after the start of
initial construction.

6.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income from a contract to provide for one or
more of the following actions, or a contract for site preparation,
constructing, furnishing or installing machinery, equipment or other tangible personal
property, including structures necessary to protect exempt incorporated
materials or installed machinery or equipment, and tangible personal property
incorporated into the project, to perform one or more of the following actions
in response to a release or suspected release of a hazardous substance,
pollutant or contaminant from a facility to the environment, unless the release
was authorized by a permit issued by a governmental authority:

(a)  Actions
to monitor, assess and evaluate such a release or a suspected release.

(b)  Excavation,
removal and transportation of contaminated soil and its treatment or disposal.

(c)  Treatment
of contaminated soil by vapor extraction, chemical or physical stabilization,
soil washing or biological treatment to reduce the concentration, toxicity or
mobility of a contaminant.

(d)  Pumping
and treatment or in situ treatment of contaminated groundwater or surface water
to reduce the concentration or toxicity of a contaminant.

(e)  The
installation of structures, such as cutoff walls or caps, to contain
contaminants present in groundwater or soil and prevent them from reaching a
location where they could threaten human health or welfare or the environment.

This
paragraph does not include asbestos removal or the construction or use of
ancillary structures such as maintenance sheds, offices or storage facilities
for unattached equipment, pollution control equipment, facilities or other
control items required or to be used by a person to prevent or control
contamination before it reaches the environment. 

7.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from a contract for the
installation, assembly, repair or maintenance of machinery, equipment or other
tangible personal property that is either deducted from the tax base of the
retail classification under section 42‑5061, subsection B or that is
exempt from use tax under section 42‑5159, subsection B and that has
independent functional utility, pursuant to the following provisions:

(a)  The
deduction provided in this paragraph includes the gross proceeds of sales or
gross income derived from all of the following:

(i)  Any
activity performed on machinery, equipment or other tangible personal property
with independent functional utility.

(ii)  Any
activity performed on any tangible personal property relating to machinery,
equipment or other tangible personal property with independent functional
utility in furtherance of any of the purposes provided for under subdivision
(d) of this paragraph.

(iii)  Any
activity that is related to the activities described in items (i) and (ii) of
this subdivision, including inspecting the installation of or testing the
machinery, equipment or other tangible personal property.

(b)  The
deduction provided in this paragraph does not include gross proceeds of sales
or gross income from the portion of any contracting activity that consists of
the development of, or modification to, real property in order to facilitate
the installation, assembly, repair, maintenance or removal of machinery,
equipment or other tangible personal property that is either deducted from the
tax base of the retail classification under section 42‑5061, subsection B
or exempt from use tax under section 42‑5159, subsection B.

(c)  The
deduction provided in this paragraph shall be determined without regard to the
size or useful life of the machinery, equipment or other tangible personal
property.

(d)  For
the purposes of this paragraph, "independent functional utility"
means that the machinery, equipment or other tangible personal property can
independently perform its function without attachment to real property, other
than attachment for any of the following purposes:

(i)  Assembling
the machinery, equipment or other tangible personal property.

(ii)  Connecting
items of machinery, equipment or other tangible personal property to each
other.

(iii)  Connecting
the machinery, equipment or other tangible personal property, whether as an
individual item or as a system of items, to water, power, gas, communication or
other services.

(iv)  Stabilizing
or protecting the machinery, equipment or other tangible personal property
during operation by bolting, burying or performing other similar nonpermanent
connections to either real property or real property improvements.

8.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the purchase of
machinery, equipment or other tangible personal property that is exempt from or
deductible from transaction privilege and use tax under:

(a)  Section
42‑5061, subsection A, paragraph 25, 29, 57 or 59.

(b)  Section
42‑5061, subsection B.

(c)  Section
42‑5159, subsection A, paragraph 13, subdivision (a), (b), (c), (d), (e),
(f), (j), (k), (m) or (n) or paragraph 54 or 56.

(d)  Section
42‑5159, subsection B.

9.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income received from a contract for the
construction of an environmentally controlled facility for the raising of
poultry for the production of eggs and the sorting, cooling and packaging of
eggs.

10.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from a contract entered
into with a person who is engaged in the commercial production of livestock,
livestock products or agricultural, horticultural, viticultural or
floricultural crops or products in this state for the modification of any
building, highway, road, excavation, manufactured building or other structure,
project, development or improvement used directly and primarily to prevent,
monitor, control or reduce air, water or land pollution.

11.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from the installation,
assembly, repair or maintenance of clean rooms that are deducted from the tax
base of the retail classification pursuant to section 42‑5061, subsection
B, paragraph 16.

12.  For
taxable periods beginning from and after June 30, 2001, the gross proceeds of
sales or gross income derived from a contract entered into for the construction
of a residential apartment housing facility that qualifies for a federal
housing subsidy for low income persons over sixty‑two years of age and
that is owned by a nonprofit charitable organization that has qualified under
section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code.

13.  For
taxable periods beginning from and after December 31, 1996 and ending before
January 1, 2017, the gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from a
contract to provide and install a solar energy device.  The
contractor shall register with the department as a solar energy
contractor.  By registering, the contractor acknowledges that it will
make its books and records relating to sales of solar energy devices available
to the department for examination.

14.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from a contract entered into
for the construction of a launch site, as defined in 14 Code of Federal
Regulations section 401.5.

15.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from a contract entered into
for the construction of a domestic violence shelter that is owned and operated
by a nonprofit charitable organization that has qualified under section
501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code.

16.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from contracts to perform
postconstruction treatment of real property for termite and general pest
control, including wood
destroying
wood‑destroying organisms.

17.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income received from contracts entered into
before July 1, 2006 for constructing a state university research infrastructure
project if the project has been reviewed by the joint committee on capital review
before the university enters into the construction contract for the
project.  For the purposes of this paragraph, "research
infrastructure" has the same meaning prescribed in section 15‑1670.

18.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income received from a contract for the
construction of any building, or other structure, project, development or
improvement owned by a qualified business under section 41‑1516 for
harvesting or processing qualifying forest products removed from qualifying
projects as defined in section 41‑1516 if actual construction begins
before January 1, 2024.  To qualify for this deduction, the prime
contractor must obtain a letter of qualification from the Arizona commerce
authority before beginning work under the contract.

19.  Any
amount of the gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to
development fees that are incurred in relation to a contract for construction,
development or improvement of real property and that are paid by a prime
contractor or subcontractor.  For the purposes of this paragraph:

(a)  The
attributable amount shall not exceed the value of the development fees actually
imposed.

(b)  The
attributable amount is equal to the total amount of development fees paid by
the prime contractor or subcontractor, and the total development fees credited
in exchange for the construction of, contribution to or dedication of real
property for providing public infrastructure, public safety or other public
services necessary to the development.  The real property must be the
subject of the development fees.

(c)  "Development
fees" means fees imposed to offset capital costs of providing public
infrastructure, public safety or other public services to a development and
authorized pursuant to section 9‑463.05, section 11‑1102 or
title 48 regardless of the jurisdiction to which the fees are paid.

20.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from a contract entered into
for the construction of a mixed waste processing facility that is located on a
municipal solid waste landfill and that is constructed for the purpose of
recycling solid waste or producing renewable energy from landfill
waste.  For the purposes of this paragraph:

(a)  "Mixed
waste processing facility" means a solid waste facility that is owned,
operated or used for the treatment, processing or disposal of solid waste,
recyclable solid waste, conditionally exempt small quantity generator waste or
household hazardous waste.  For the purposes of
this subdivision, "conditionally exempt small quantity generator
waste", "household hazardous waste" and "solid waste
facility" have the same meanings prescribed in section 49‑701, except
that solid waste facility does include a site that stores, treats or processes
paper, glass, wood, cardboard, household textiles, scrap metal, plastic,
vegetative waste, aluminum, steel or other recyclable material.

(b)  "Municipal
solid waste landfill" has the same meaning prescribed in section 49‑701.

(c)  "Recycling"
means collecting, separating, cleansing, treating and reconstituting recyclable
solid waste that would otherwise become solid waste, but does not include
incineration or other similar processes.

(d)  "Renewable
energy" has the same meaning prescribed in section 41‑1511.

C.  Entitlement
to the deduction pursuant to subsection B, paragraph 7 of this section is
subject to the following provisions:

1.  A
prime contractor may establish entitlement to the deduction by both:

(a)  Marking
the invoice for the transaction to indicate that the gross proceeds of sales or
gross income derived from the transaction was deducted from the base.

(b)  Obtaining
a certificate executed by the purchaser indicating the name and address of the
purchaser, the precise nature of the business of the purchaser, the purpose for
which the purchase was made, the necessary facts to establish the deductibility
of the property under section 42‑5061, subsection B, and a certification
that the person executing the certificate is authorized to do so on behalf of
the purchaser.  The certificate may be disregarded if the prime
contractor has reason to believe that the information contained in the
certificate is not accurate or complete.

2.  A
person who does not comply with paragraph 1 of this subsection may establish
entitlement to the deduction by presenting facts necessary to support the
entitlement, but the burden of proof is on that person.

3.  The
department may prescribe a form for the certificate described in paragraph 1,
subdivision (b) of this subsection.  The department may also adopt
rules that describe the transactions with respect to which a person is not
entitled to rely solely on the information contained in the certificate
provided in paragraph 1, subdivision (b) of this subsection but must instead
obtain such additional information as required in order to be entitled to the
deduction.

4.  If
a prime contractor is entitled to a deduction by complying with paragraph 1 of
this subsection, the department may require the purchaser who caused the
execution of the certificate to establish the accuracy and completeness of the
information required to be contained in the certificate that would entitle the
prime contractor to the deduction.  If the purchaser cannot establish
the accuracy and completeness of the information, the purchaser is liable in an
amount equal to any tax, penalty and interest that the prime contractor would
have been required to pay under article 1 of this chapter if the prime
contractor had not complied with paragraph 1 of this
subsection.  Payment of the amount under this paragraph exempts the
purchaser from liability for any tax imposed under article 4 of this
chapter.  The amount shall be treated as a transaction privilege tax
to the purchaser and as tax revenues collected from the prime contractor in
order to designate the distribution base for purposes of section 42‑5029.

D.  Subcontractors
or others who perform modification activities are not subject to tax if they
can demonstrate that the job was within the control of a prime contractor or
contractors or a dealership of manufactured buildings and that the prime
contractor or dealership is liable for the tax on the gross income, gross
proceeds of sales or gross receipts attributable to the job and from which the
subcontractors or others were paid.

E.  Amounts
received by a contractor for a project are excluded from the contractor's gross
proceeds of sales or gross income derived from the business if the person who
hired the contractor executes and provides a certificate to the contractor
stating that the person providing the certificate is a prime contractor and is
liable for the tax under article 1 of this chapter.  The department
shall prescribe the form of the certificate.  If the contractor has
reason to believe that the information contained on the certificate is erroneous
or incomplete, the department may disregard the certificate.  If the
person who provides the certificate is not liable for the tax as a prime
contractor, that person is nevertheless deemed to be the prime contractor in
lieu of the contractor and is subject to the tax under this section on the
gross receipts or gross proceeds received by the contractor.

F.  Every
person engaging or continuing in this state in the business of prime
contracting or dealership of manufactured buildings shall present to the purchaser
of such prime contracting or manufactured building a written receipt of the
gross income or gross proceeds of sales from such activity and shall separately
state the taxes to be paid pursuant to this section.

G.  For
the purposes of section 42‑5032.01, the department shall separately
account for revenues collected under the prime contracting classification from
any prime contractor engaged in the preparation or construction of a
multipurpose facility, and related infrastructure, that is owned, operated or
leased by the tourism and sports authority pursuant to title 5, chapter 8.

H.  For
the purposes of section 42‑5032.02, from and after September 30,
2013, the department shall separately account for revenues reported and
collected under the prime contracting classification from any prime contractor
engaged in the construction of any buildings and associated improvements that
are for the benefit of a manufacturing facility.  For the purposes of
this subsection, "associated improvements" and "manufacturing
facility" have the same meanings prescribed in section 42‑5032.02.

I.  The gross proceeds
of sales or gross income derived from a contract for lawn maintenance services
are not subject to tax under this section if the contract does not include
landscaping activities.  Lawn maintenance service is a service
pursuant to section 42‑5061, subsection A, paragraph 1, and includes
lawn mowing and edging, weeding, repairing sprinkler heads or drip irrigation
heads, seasonal replacement of flowers, refreshing gravel, lawn de‑thatching dethatching, seeding winter lawns, leaf and
debris collection and removal, tree or shrub pruning or clipping, garden and
gravel raking and applying pesticides, as defined in section 3‑361, and
fertilizer materials, as defined in section 3‑262.

J.  Except
as provided in subsection O of this section, the gross proceeds of sales or
gross income derived from landscaping activities are subject to tax under this
section.  Landscaping includes installing lawns, grading or leveling
ground, installing gravel or boulders, planting trees and other plants, felling
trees, removing or mulching tree stumps, removing other imbedded plants,
building irrigation berms, installing railroad ties and installing underground
sprinkler or watering systems.

K.  The
portion of gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the actual
direct costs of providing architectural or engineering services that are
incorporated in a contract is not subject to tax under this
section.  For the purposes of this subsection, "direct
costs" means the portion of the actual costs that are directly expended in
providing architectural or engineering services.

L.  Operating
a landfill or a solid waste disposal facility is not subject to taxation under
this section, including filling, compacting and creating vehicle access to and
from cell sites within the landfill. Constructing roads to a landfill or solid
waste disposal facility and constructing cells within a landfill or solid waste
disposal facility may be deemed prime contracting under this section.

M.  The
following apply in determining the taxable situs of sales of manufactured
buildings:

1.  For
sales in this state where the manufactured building dealer contracts to deliver
the building to a setup site or to perform the setup in this state, the taxable
situs is the setup site.

2.  For
sales in this state where the manufactured building dealer does not contract to
deliver the building to a setup site or does not perform the setup, the taxable
situs is the location of the dealership where the building is delivered to the
buyer.

3.  For
sales in this state where the manufactured building dealer contracts to deliver
the building to a setup site that is outside this state, the situs is outside
this state and the transaction is excluded from tax.

N.  The gross proceeds
of sales or gross income attributable to a written contract for design phase
services or professional services, executed before modification begins and with
terms, conditions and pricing of all of these services separately stated in the
contract from those for construction phase services, is not subject to tax
under this section, regardless of whether the services are provided sequential
to or concurrent with prime contracting activities that are subject to tax under
this section.  This subsection does not include the gross proceeds of
sales or gross income attributable to construction phase
services.  For the purposes of this subsection: 

1.  "Construction
phase services" means services for the execution and completion of any
modification, including the following:

(a)  Administration
or supervision of any modification performed on the project, including team
management and coordination, scheduling, cost controls, submittal process
management, field management, safety program, close-out process and warranty
period services.

(b)  Administration
or supervision of any modification performed pursuant to a punch
list.  For the purposes of this subdivision, "punch list"
means minor items of modification work performed after substantial completion
and before final completion of the project.

(c)  Administration
or supervision of any modification performed pursuant to change
orders.  For the purposes of this subdivision, "change
order" means a written instrument issued after execution of a contract for
modification work, providing for all of the following:

(i)  The
scope of a change in the modification work, contract for modification work or
other contract documents.

(ii)  The
amount of an adjustment, if any, to the guaranteed maximum price as set in the
contract for modification work.  For the purposes of this item,
"guaranteed maximum price" means the amount guaranteed to be the
maximum amount due to a prime contractor for the performance of all modification
work for the project.

(iii)  The
extent of an adjustment, if any, to the contract time of performance set forth
in the contract.

(d)  Administration
or supervision of any modification performed pursuant to change
directives.  For the purposes of this subdivision, "change directive"
means a written order directing a change in modification work before agreement
on an adjustment of the guaranteed maximum price or contract time.

(e)  Inspection
to determine the dates of substantial completion or final completion.

(f)  Preparation
of any manuals, warranties, as-built drawings, spares or other items the prime
contractor must furnish pursuant to the contract for modification
work.  For the purposes of this subdivision, "as-built
drawing" means a drawing that indicates field changes made to adapt to
field conditions, field changes resulting from change orders or buried and
concealed installation of piping, conduit and utility services.

(g)  Preparation
of status reports after modification work has begun detailing the progress of
work performed, including preparation of any of the following:

(i)  Master
schedule updates.

(ii)  Modification
work cash flow projection updates.

(iii)  Site
reports made on a periodic basis.

(iv)  Identification
of discrepancies, conflicts or ambiguities in modification work documents that
require resolution.

(v)  Identification
of any health and safety issues that have arisen in connection with the
modification work.

(h)  Preparation
of daily logs of modification work, including documentation of personnel, weather
conditions and on-site occurrences.

(i)  Preparation
of any submittals or shop drawings used by the prime contractor to illustrate
details of the modification work performed.

(j)  Administration
or supervision of any other activities for which a prime contractor receives a
certificate for payment or certificate for final payment based on the progress
of modification work performed on the project.

2.  "Design
phase services" means services for developing and completing a design for
a project that are not construction phase services, including the following:

(a)  Evaluating
surveys, reports, test results or any other information on-site conditions for
the project, including physical characteristics, legal limitations and utility
locations for the site.

(b)  Evaluating
any criteria or programming objectives for the project to ascertain
requirements for the project, such as physical requirements affecting cost or
projected utilization of the project.

(c)  Preparing
drawings and specifications for architectural program documents, schematic
design documents, design development documents, modification work documents or
documents that identify the scope of or materials for the project.

(d)  Preparing
an initial schedule for the project, excluding the preparation of updates to
the master schedule after modification work has begun.

(e)  Preparing
preliminary estimates of costs of modification work before completion of the
final design of the project, including an estimate or schedule of values for
any of the following:

(i)  Labor,
materials, machinery and equipment, tools, water, heat, utilities,
transportation and other facilities and services used in the execution and
completion of modification work, regardless of whether they are temporary or
permanent or whether they are incorporated in the modifications.

(ii)  The
cost of labor and materials to be furnished by the owner of the real property.

(iii)  The
cost of any equipment of the owner of the real property to be assigned by the
owner to the prime contractor.

(iv)  The
cost of any labor for installation of equipment separately provided by the
owner of the real property that has been designed, specified, selected or
specifically provided for in any design document for the project.

(v)  Any
fee paid by the owner of the real property to the prime contractor pursuant to
the contract for modification work.

(vi)  Any
bond and insurance premiums.

(vii)  Any
applicable taxes.

(viii)  Any
contingency fees for the prime contractor that may be used before final
completion of the project.

(f)  Reviewing
and evaluating cost estimates and project documents to prepare recommendations
on site use, site improvements, selection of materials, building systems and
equipment, modification feasibility, availability of materials and labor, local
modification activity as related to schedules and time requirements for
modification work. 

(g)  Preparing
the plan and procedures for selection of subcontractors, including any
prequalification of subcontractor candidates.

3.  "Professional
services" means architect services, engineer services, geologist services,
land surveying services or landscape architect services that are within the
scope of those services as provided in title 32, chapter 1 and for which gross
proceeds of sales or gross income has not otherwise been deducted under
subsection K of this section.

O.  The
gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from a contract with the owner
of real property or improvements to real property for the maintenance, repair,
replacement or alteration of existing property is not subject to tax under this
section if the contract does not include modification activities, except as
specified in this subsection.  The gross proceeds of sales or gross
income derived from a de minimis amount of modification activity does not
subject the contract or any part of the contract to tax under this
section.  For the purposes of this subsection: 

1.  Tangible
personal property that is incorporated or fabricated into a project described
in this subsection may be subject to the amount prescribed in section 42‑5008.01.

2.  Each
contract is independent of any other contract, except that any change order
that directly relates to the scope of work of the original contract shall be
treated the same as the original contract under this chapter, regardless of the
amount of modification activities included in the change order.  If a
change order does not directly relate to the scope of work of the original
contract, the change order shall be treated as a new contract, with the tax
treatment of any subsequent change order to follow the tax treatment of the
contract to which the scope of work of the subsequent change order directly
relates. 

P.  Notwithstanding
subsection O of this section, a contract that primarily involves surface or
subsurface improvements to land and that is subject to title 28, chapter 19, 20
or 22 or title 34, chapter 2 or 6 is taxable under this section, even if the
contract also includes vertical improvements.  Agencies that are
subject to procurement processes under those provisions shall include in the
request for proposals a notice to bidders when those projects are subject to
this section.  This subsection does not apply to contracts with:

1.  Community
facilities districts, fire districts, county television improvement districts,
community park maintenance districts, cotton pest control districts, hospital
districts, pest abatement districts, health service districts, agricultural
improvement districts, county free library districts, county jail districts,
county stadium districts, special health care districts, public health services
districts, theme park districts, regional attraction districts or
revitalization districts.  

2.  Any
special taxing district not specified in paragraph 1 of this subsection if the
district does not substantially engage in the modification, maintenance,
repair, replacement or alteration of surface or subsurface improvements to
land.

Q.  Notwithstanding
subsection R, paragraph 10 of this section, a person owning real property who
enters into a contract for sale of the real property, who is responsible to the
new owner of the property for modifications made to the property in the period
subsequent to the transfer of title and who receives a consideration for the
modifications is considered a prime contractor solely for purposes of taxing
the gross proceeds of sale or gross income received for the modifications made
subsequent to the transfer of title.  The original owner's gross
proceeds of sale or gross income received for the modifications shall be
determined according to the following methodology:

1.  If
any part of the contract for sale of the property specifies amounts to be paid
to the original owner for the modifications to be made in the period subsequent
to the transfer of title, the amounts are included in the original owner's
gross proceeds of sale or gross income under this section.  Proceeds
from the sale of the property that are received after transfer of title and
that are unrelated to the modifications made subsequent to the transfer of
title are not considered gross proceeds of sale or gross income from the
modifications.

2.  If
the original owner enters into an agreement separate from the contract for sale
of the real property providing for amounts to be paid to the original owner for
the modifications to be made in the period subsequent to the transfer of title
to the property, the amounts are included in the original owner's gross
proceeds of sale or gross income received for the modifications made subsequent
to the transfer of title.

3.  If
the original owner is responsible to the new owner for modifications made to
the property in the period subsequent to the transfer of title and derives any
gross proceeds of sale or gross income from the project subsequent to the
transfer of title other than a delayed disbursement from escrow unrelated to
the modifications, it is presumed that the amounts are received for the
modifications made subsequent to the transfer of title unless the contrary is
established by the owner through its books, records and papers kept in the
regular course of business.

4.  The
tax base of the original owner is computed in the same manner as a prime
contractor under this section.

R.  Notwithstanding
subsection B of this section, the activities described in subsection B,
paragraphs 1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 14, 15, 16 and 19 are not deductible in
computing the tax base for taxable periods beginning from and after December
31, 2027.

R.  S.  For the purposes of
this section:

1.  "Alteration"
means an activity or action that causes a direct physical change to existing
property.  For the purposes of this paragraph:

(a)  For
existing property that is properly classified as class two property under
section 42‑12002, paragraph 1, subdivision (c) or paragraph 2,
subdivision (c) and that is used for residential purposes, class three property
under section 42‑12003 or class four property under section 42‑12004, this paragraph
does not apply if the contract amount is more than twenty-five percent of the
most recent full cash value established under chapter 13, article 2 of this
title as of the date of any bid for the work or the date of the contract,
whichever value is higher.

(b)  For
all existing property other than existing property described in subdivision (a)
of this paragraph, this paragraph does not apply if any of the following is
true:

(i)  The
contract amount is more than seven hundred fifty thousand dollars.

(ii)  The
scope of work directly relates to more than forty percent of the existing
square footage of the existing property.

(iii)  The
scope of work involves expanding the square footage of more than ten percent of
the existing property.

(c)  Project
elements may not be artificially separated from a contract to cause a project
to qualify as an alteration.  The department has the burden of proof
that project elements have been artificially separated from a contract.

(d)  If
a project for which the owner and the person performing the work reasonably
believed, at the inception of the contract, would be treated as an alteration
under this paragraph and, on completion of the project, the project exceeded
the applicable threshold described in either subdivision (a) or (b) of this
paragraph by no more than twenty-five percent of the applicable threshold for
any reason, the work performed under the contract qualifies as an alteration.

(e)  A
change order that directly relates to the scope of work of the original
contract shall be treated as part of the original contract, and the contract
amount shall include any amount attributable to a change order that directly
relates to the scope of work of the original contract.

(f)  Alteration
does not include maintenance, repair or replacement.

2.  "Contracting"
means engaging in business as a contractor.

3.  "Contractor"
is synonymous with the term "builder" and means any person or
organization that undertakes to or offers to undertake to, or purports to have
the capacity to undertake to, or submits a bid to, or does personally or by or
through others, modify any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation,
manufactured building or other structure, project, development or improvement,
or to do any part of such a project, including the erection of scaffolding or
other structure or works in connection with such a project, and includes
subcontractors and specialty contractors.  For all purposes of
taxation or deduction, this definition shall govern without regard to whether
or not such a
contractor is
acting in fulfillment of a contract.

4.  "Manufactured
building" means a manufactured home, mobile home or factory‑built
building, as defined in section 41‑4001.

5.  "Manufactured
building dealer" means a dealer who either:

(a)  Is
licensed pursuant to title 41, chapter 37, article 4 and who sells manufactured
buildings to the final consumer.

(b)  Supervises,
performs or coordinates the excavation and completion of site improvements or
the setup of a manufactured building, including the contracting, if any, with
any subcontractor or specialty contractor for the completion of the contract.

6.  "Modification"
means construction, grading and leveling ground, wreckage or
demolition.  Modification does not include:

(a)  Any
project described in subsection O of this section. 

(b)  Any
wreckage or demolition of existing property, or any other activity that is a
necessary component of a project described in subsection O of this section. 

(c)  Any
mobilization or demobilization related to a project described in subsection O
of this section, such as the erection or removal of temporary facilities to be
used by those persons working on the project.

7.  "Modify"
means to make a modification or cause a modification to be made.

8.  "Owner"
means the person that holds title to the real property or improvements to real
property that is the subject of the work, as well as an agent of the title
holder and any person with the authority to perform or authorize work on the
real property or improvements, including a tenant and a property
manager.  For the purposes of subsection O of this section, a person
who is hired by a general contractor that is hired by an owner, or a
subcontractor of a general contractor that is hired by an owner, is considered
to be hired by the owner.

9.  "Prime
contracting" means engaging in business as a prime contractor.

10.  "Prime
contractor" means a contractor who supervises, performs or coordinates the
modification of any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation, manufactured
building or other structure, project, development or improvement, including the
contracting, if any, with any subcontractors or specialty contractors and who
is responsible for the completion of the contract.  Except as
provided in subsections E and Q of this section, a person who owns real
property, who engages one or more contractors to modify that real property and
who does not itself modify that real property is not a prime contractor within
the meaning of this paragraph regardless of the existence of a contract for
sale or the subsequent sale of that real property.

11.  "Replacement"
means the removal from service of one component or system of existing property
or tangible personal property installed in existing property, including
machinery or equipment, and the installation of a new component or system or
new tangible personal property, including machinery or equipment, that provides
the same,
a similar or an upgraded design or functionality,
regardless of the contract amount and regardless of whether the existing
component or system or existing tangible personal property is physically
removed from the existing property.

12.  "Sale
of a used manufactured building" does not include a lease of a used
manufactured building. END_STATUTE

Sec. 14.  Delayed repeal

Title 42,
chapter 5, article 3, Arizona Revised Statutes, is repealed from and after
December 31, 2027.

Sec. 15.  Section 42-5159, Arizona Revised
Statutes, as amended by Senate Bill 1010, section 13, fifty-third legislature,
first regular session, as transmitted to the governor, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE42-5159.  Exemptions

A.  The
tax levied by this article does not apply to the storage, use or consumption in
this state of the following described tangible personal property:

1.  Tangible
personal property, sold in this state, the gross receipts from the sale of
which are included in the measure of the tax imposed by articles 1 and 2 of
this chapter.

2.  Tangible
personal property, the sale or use of which has already been subjected to an
excise tax at a rate equal to or exceeding the tax imposed by this article
under the laws of another state of the United States.  If the excise
tax imposed by the other state is at a rate less than the tax imposed by this article,
the tax imposed by this article is reduced by the amount of the tax already
imposed by the other state.

3.  Tangible
personal property, the storage, use or consumption of which the constitution or
laws of the United States prohibit this state from taxing or to the extent that
the rate or imposition of tax is unconstitutional under the laws of the United
States.

4.  Tangible
personal property that directly enters into and becomes an ingredient or
component part of any manufactured, fabricated or processed article, substance
or commodity for sale in the regular course of business.

5.  Motor
vehicle fuel and use fuel, the sales, distribution or use of which in this
state is subject to the tax imposed under title 28, chapter 16, article 1, use
fuel that is sold to or used by a person holding a valid single trip use fuel
tax permit issued under section 28‑5739, aviation fuel, the sales,
distribution or use of which in this state is subject to the tax imposed under
section 28‑8344, and jet fuel, the sales, distribution or use of which in
this state is subject to the tax imposed under article 8 of this chapter.

6.  Tangible
personal property brought into this state by an individual who was a
nonresident at the time the property was purchased for storage, use or consumption
by the individual if the first actual use or consumption of the property was
outside this state, unless the property is used in conducting a business in
this state.

7.  Purchases
of implants used as growth promotants and injectable medicines, not already
exempt under paragraph 16 of this subsection, for livestock and poultry owned
by, or in possession of, persons who are engaged in producing livestock,
poultry, or livestock or poultry products, or who are engaged in feeding
livestock or poultry commercially.  For the purposes of this
paragraph, "poultry" includes ratites.

8.  Purchases
of:

(a)  Livestock
and poultry to persons engaging in the businesses of farming, ranching or
producing livestock or poultry.

(b)  Livestock
and poultry feed, supplies, salts, vitamins and other additives sold to persons
for use or consumption in the businesses of farming, ranching and producing or
feeding livestock or poultry or for use or consumption in noncommercial
boarding of livestock.  For the purposes of this paragraph,
"poultry" includes ratites.

9.  Seeds,
seedlings, roots, bulbs, cuttings and other propagative material for use in
commercially producing agricultural, horticultural, viticultural or
floricultural crops in this state.

10.  Tangible
personal property not exceeding two hundred dollars in any one month purchased
by an individual at retail outside the continental limits of the United States
for the individual's own personal use and enjoyment.

11.  Advertising
supplements that are intended for sale with newspapers published in this state
and that have already been subjected to an excise tax under the laws of another
state in the United States that equals or exceeds the tax imposed by this
article.

12.  Materials
that are purchased by or for publicly funded libraries including school
district libraries, charter school libraries, community college libraries,
state university libraries or federal, state, county or municipal libraries for
use by the public as follows:

(a)  Printed
or photographic materials, beginning August 7, 1985.

(b)  Electronic
or digital media materials, beginning July 17, 1994.

13.  Tangible
personal property purchased by:

(a)  A
hospital organized and operated exclusively for charitable purposes, no part of
the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or
individual.

(b)  A
hospital operated by this state or a political subdivision of this state.

(c)  A
licensed nursing care institution or a licensed residential care institution or
a residential care facility operated in conjunction with a licensed nursing
care institution or a licensed kidney dialysis center, which provides medical
services, nursing services or health related services and is not used or held
for profit.

(d)  A
qualifying health care organization, as defined in section 42‑5001,
if the tangible personal property is used by the organization solely to provide
health and medical related educational and charitable services.

(e)  A
qualifying health care organization as defined in section 42‑5001 if
the organization is dedicated to providing educational, therapeutic,
rehabilitative and family medical education training for blind and visually
impaired children and children with multiple disabilities from the time of
birth to age twenty‑one.

(f)  A
nonprofit charitable organization that has qualified under section 501(c)(3) of
the United States internal revenue code and that engages in and uses such
property exclusively in programs for persons with mental or physical
disabilities if the programs are exclusively for training, job placement,
rehabilitation or testing.

(g)  A
person that is subject to tax under this chapter by reason of being engaged in
business classified under section 42‑5075, or a subcontractor working
under the control of a person that is engaged in business classified under
section 42‑5075, if the tangible personal property is any of the
following:

(i)  Incorporated
or fabricated by the person into a structure, project, development or
improvement in fulfillment of a contract.

(ii)  Incorporated
or fabricated by the person into any project described in section 42‑5075,
subsection O.

(iii)  Used
in environmental response or remediation activities under section 42‑5075,
subsection B, paragraph 6.

(h)  A
person that is not subject to tax under section 42‑5075 and that has been
provided a copy of a certificate described in section 42‑5009,
subsection L, if the property purchased is incorporated or fabricated by the
person into the real property, structure, project, development or improvement
described in the certificate.

(i)  A
nonprofit charitable organization that has qualified under section 501(c)(3) of
the internal revenue code if the property is purchased from the parent or an
affiliate organization that is located outside this state.

(j)  A
qualifying community health center as defined in section 42‑5001.

(k)  A
nonprofit charitable organization that has qualified under section 501(c)(3) of
the internal revenue code and that regularly serves meals to the needy and
indigent on a continuing basis at no cost.

(l)  A
person engaged in business under the transient lodging classification if the
property is a personal hygiene item or articles used by human beings for food,
drink or condiment, except alcoholic beverages, which are furnished without
additional charge to and intended to be consumed by the transient during the
transient's occupancy.

(m)  For
taxable periods beginning from and after June 30, 2001, a nonprofit charitable
organization that has qualified under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue
code and that provides residential apartment housing for low income persons
over sixty‑two years of age in a facility that qualifies for a federal
housing subsidy, if the tangible personal property is used by the organization
solely to provide residential apartment housing for low income persons over
sixty‑two years of age in a facility that qualifies for a federal housing
subsidy.

(n)  A
qualifying health sciences educational institution as defined in section 42‑5001.

(o)  A
person representing or working on behalf of any person described in subdivision
(a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (i), (j), (k), (m) or (n) of this paragraph, if
the tangible personal property is incorporated or fabricated into a project
described in section 42‑5075, subsection O.

14.  Commodities,
as defined by title 7 United States Code section 2, that are consigned for
resale in a warehouse in this state in or from which the commodity is
deliverable on a contract for future delivery subject to the rules of a commodity
market regulated by the United States commodity futures trading commission.

15.  Tangible
personal property sold by:

(a)  Any
nonprofit organization organized and operated exclusively for charitable
purposes and recognized by the United States internal revenue service under
section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code.

(b)  A
nonprofit organization that is exempt from taxation under section 501(c)(3),
501(c)(4) or 501(c)(6) of the internal revenue code if the organization is
associated with a major league baseball team or a national touring professional
golfing association and no part of the organization's net earnings inures to
the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.

(c)  A
nonprofit organization that is exempt from taxation under section 501(c)(3),
501(c)(4), 501(c)(6), 501(c)(7) or 501(c)(8) of the internal revenue code if
the organization sponsors or operates a rodeo featuring primarily farm and
ranch animals and no part of the organization's net earnings inures to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual.

16.  Drugs
and medical oxygen, including delivery hose, mask or tent, regulator and tank,
on the prescription of a member of the medical, dental or veterinarian
profession who is licensed by law to administer such substances.

17.  Prosthetic
appliances, as defined in section 23‑501, prescribed or recommended by a
person who is licensed, registered or otherwise professionally credentialed as
a physician, dentist, podiatrist, chiropractor, naturopath, homeopath, nurse or
optometrist.

18.  Prescription
eyeglasses and contact lenses.

19.  Insulin,
insulin syringes and glucose test strips.

20.  Hearing
aids as defined in section 36‑1901.

21.  Durable
medical equipment that has a centers for medicare and medicaid services common
procedure code, is designated reimbursable by medicare, is prescribed by a
person who is licensed under title 32, chapter 7, 13, 17 or 29, can withstand
repeated use, is primarily and customarily used to serve a medical purpose, is
generally not useful to a person in the absence of illness or injury and is
appropriate for use in the home.

22.  Food,
as provided in and subject to the conditions of article 3 of this chapter and
section 42‑5074.

23.  Items
purchased with United States department of agriculture food stamp coupons
issued under the food stamp act of 1977 (P.L. 95‑113; 91 Stat. 958) or
food instruments issued under section 17 of the child nutrition act (P.L. 95‑627;
92 Stat. 3603; P.L. 99‑661, section 4302; 42 United States Code
section 1786).

24.  Food
and drink provided without monetary charge by a taxpayer that is subject to
section 42‑5074 to its employees for their own consumption on the
premises during the employees' hours of employment.

25.  Tangible
personal property that is used or consumed in a business subject to section 42‑5074
for human food, drink or condiment, whether simple, mixed or compounded.

26.  Food,
drink or condiment and accessory tangible personal property that are acquired
for use by or provided to a school district or charter school if they are to be
either served or prepared and served to persons for consumption on the premises
of a public school in the school district or on the premises of the charter
school during school hours.

27.  Lottery
tickets or shares purchased pursuant to title 5, chapter 5.1, article 1.

28.  Textbooks,
sold by a bookstore, that are required by any state university or community
college.

29.  Magazines,
other periodicals or other publications produced by this state to encourage
tourist travel.

30.  Paper
machine clothing, such as forming fabrics and dryer felts, purchased by a paper
manufacturer and directly used or consumed in paper manufacturing.

31.  Coal,
petroleum, coke, natural gas, virgin fuel oil and electricity purchased by a
qualified environmental technology manufacturer, producer or processor as
defined in section 41‑1514.02 and directly used or consumed in the
generation or provision of on‑site power or energy solely for
environmental technology manufacturing, producing or processing or
environmental protection.  This paragraph shall apply for twenty full
consecutive calendar or fiscal years from the date the first paper
manufacturing machine is placed in service.  In the case of an
environmental technology manufacturer, producer or processor who does not
manufacture paper, the time period shall begin with the date the first
manufacturing, processing or production equipment is placed in service.

32.  Motor
vehicles that are removed from inventory by a motor vehicle dealer as defined
in section 28‑4301 and that are provided to:

(a)  Charitable
or educational institutions that are exempt from taxation under section
501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code.

(b)  Public
educational institutions.

(c)  State
universities or affiliated organizations of a state university if no part of
the organization's net earnings inures to the benefit of any private
shareholder or individual.

33.  Natural
gas or liquefied petroleum gas used to propel a motor vehicle.

34.  Machinery,
equipment, technology or related supplies that are only useful to assist a
person with a physical disability as defined in section 46‑191 or a
person who has a developmental disability as defined in section 36‑551 or
has a head injury as defined in section 41‑3201 to be more independent
and functional.

35.  Liquid,
solid or gaseous chemicals used in manufacturing, processing, fabricating,
mining, refining, metallurgical operations, research and development and,
beginning on January 1, 1999, printing, if using or consuming the chemicals,
alone or as part of an integrated system of chemicals, involves direct contact
with the materials from which the product is produced for the purpose of
causing or permitting a chemical or physical change to occur in the materials
as part of the production process.  This paragraph does not include
chemicals that are used or consumed in activities such as packaging, storage or
transportation but does not affect any exemption for such chemicals that is
otherwise provided by this section.  For the purposes of this
paragraph, "printing" means a commercial printing operation and
includes job printing, engraving, embossing, copying and bookbinding.

36.  Food,
drink and condiment purchased for consumption within the premises of any
prison, jail or other institution under the jurisdiction of the state
department of corrections, the department of public safety, the department of
juvenile corrections or a county sheriff.

37.  A
motor vehicle and any repair and replacement parts and tangible personal
property becoming a part of such motor vehicle sold to a motor carrier who is
subject to a fee prescribed in title 28, chapter 16, article 4 and who is
engaged in the business of leasing or renting such property.

38.  Tangible
personal property that is or directly enters into and becomes an ingredient or
component part of cards used as prescription plan identification cards.

39.  Overhead
materials or other tangible personal property that is used in performing a
contract between the United States government and a manufacturer, modifier,
assembler or repairer, including property used in performing a subcontract with
a government contractor who is a manufacturer, modifier, assembler or repairer,
to which title passes to the government under the terms of the contract or
subcontract.  For the purposes of this paragraph:

(a)  "Overhead
materials" means tangible personal property, the gross proceeds of sales
or gross income derived from which would otherwise be included in the retail
classification, that is used or consumed in the performance of a contract, the
cost of which is charged to an overhead expense account and allocated to
various contracts based on generally accepted accounting principles and
consistent with government contract accounting standards.

(b)  "Subcontract"
means an agreement between a contractor and any person who is not an employee
of the contractor for furnishing of supplies or services that, in whole or in
part, are necessary to the performance of one or more government contracts, or
under which any portion of the contractor's obligation under one or more
government contracts is performed, undertaken or assumed, and that includes
provisions causing title to overhead materials or other tangible personal
property used in the performance of the subcontract to pass to the government
or that includes provisions incorporating such title passing clauses in a
government contract into the subcontract.

40.  Through
December 31, 1994, tangible personal property sold pursuant to a personal
property liquidation transaction, as defined in section 42‑5061.  From
and after December 31, 1994, tangible personal property sold pursuant to a
personal property liquidation transaction, as defined in section 42‑5061,
if the gross proceeds of the sales were included in the measure of the tax
imposed by article 1 of this chapter or if the personal property liquidation
was a casual activity or transaction.

41.  Wireless
telecommunications equipment that is held for sale or transfer to a customer as
an inducement to enter into or continue a contract for telecommunications
services that are taxable under section 42‑5064.

42.  Alternative
fuel, as defined in section 1‑215, purchased by a used oil fuel burner
who has received a permit to burn used oil or used oil fuel under section 49‑426
or 49‑480.

43.  Tangible
personal property purchased by a commercial airline and consisting of food,
beverages and condiments and accessories used for serving the food and
beverages, if those items are to be provided without additional charge to passengers
for consumption in flight.  For the purposes of this paragraph,
"commercial airline" means a person holding a federal certificate of
public convenience and necessity or foreign air carrier permit for air
transportation to transport persons, property or United States mail in
intrastate, interstate or foreign commerce.

44.  Alternative
fuel vehicles if the vehicle was manufactured as a diesel fuel vehicle and
converted to operate on alternative fuel and equipment that is installed in a
conventional diesel fuel motor vehicle to convert the vehicle to operate on an
alternative fuel, as defined in section 1‑215.

45.  Gas
diverted from a pipeline, by a person engaged in the business of:

(a)  Operating
a natural or artificial gas pipeline, and used or consumed for the sole purpose
of fueling compressor equipment that pressurizes the pipeline.

(b)  Converting
natural gas into liquefied natural gas, and used or consumed for the sole
purpose of fueling compressor equipment used in the conversion process.

46.  Tangible
personal property that is excluded, exempt or deductible from transaction
privilege tax pursuant to section 42‑5063.

47.  Tangible
personal property purchased to be incorporated or installed as part of
environmental response or remediation activities under section 42‑5075,
subsection B, paragraph 6.

48.  Tangible
personal property sold by a nonprofit organization that is exempt from taxation
under section 501(c)(6) of the internal revenue code if the organization
produces, organizes or promotes cultural or civic related festivals or events
and no part of the organization's net earnings inures to the benefit of any
private shareholder or individual.

49.  Prepared
food, drink or condiment donated by a restaurant as classified in section 42‑5074,
subsection A to a nonprofit charitable organization that has qualified under
section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code and that regularly serves meals
to the needy and indigent on a continuing basis at no cost.

50.  Application
services that are designed to assess or test student learning or to promote
curriculum design or enhancement purchased by or for any school district,
charter school, community college or state university.  For the
purposes of this paragraph:

(a)  "Application
services" means software applications provided remotely using hypertext
transfer protocol or another network protocol.

(b)  "Curriculum
design or enhancement" means planning, implementing or reporting on
courses of study, lessons, assignments or other learning activities.

51.  Motor
vehicle fuel and use fuel to a qualified business under section 41‑1516
for off-road use in harvesting, processing or transporting qualifying forest
products removed from qualifying projects as defined in section 41‑1516.

52.  Repair
parts installed in equipment used directly by a qualified business under
section 41‑1516 in harvesting, processing or transporting qualifying
forest products removed from qualifying projects as defined in section 41‑1516.

53.  Renewable
energy credits or any other unit created to track energy derived from renewable
energy resources.  For the purposes of this paragraph,
"renewable energy credit" means a unit created administratively by
the corporation commission or governing body of a public power entity to track
kilowatt hours of electricity derived from a renewable energy resource or the
kilowatt hour equivalent of conventional energy resources displaced by
distributed renewable energy resources.

54.  Computer
data center equipment sold to the owner, operator or qualified colocation
tenant of a computer data center that is certified by the Arizona commerce
authority under section 41‑1519 or an authorized agent of the owner,
operator or qualified colocation tenant during the qualification period for use
in the qualified computer data center.  For the purposes of this
paragraph, "computer data center", "computer data center
equipment", "qualification period" and "qualified
colocation tenant" have the same meanings prescribed in section 41‑1519.

55.  Coal
acquired from an owner or operator of a power plant by a person who is
responsible for refining coal if both of the following apply:

(a)  The
transfer of title or possession of the coal is for the purpose of refining the
coal.

(b)  The
title or possession of the coal is transferred back to the owner or operator of
the power plant after completion of the coal refining process.  For
the purposes of this subdivision, "coal refining process" means the
application of a coal additive system that aids the reduction of power plant
emissions during the combustion of coal and the treatment of flue gas.

56.  Tangible
personal property incorporated or fabricated into a project described in
section 42‑5075, subsection O, that is located within the exterior
boundaries of an Indian reservation for which the owner, as defined in section
42‑5075, of the project is an Indian tribe or an affiliated
Indian.  For the purposes of this paragraph:

(a)  "Affiliated
Indian" means an individual native American Indian who is duly registered
on the tribal rolls of the Indian tribe for whose benefit the Indian
reservation was established.

(b)  "Indian
reservation" means all lands that are within the limits of areas set aside
by the United States for the exclusive use and occupancy of an Indian tribe by
treaty, law or executive order and that are recognized as Indian reservations
by the United States department of the interior.

(c)  "Indian
tribe" means any organized nation, tribe, band or community that is
recognized as an Indian tribe by the United States department of the interior
and includes any entity formed under the laws of the Indian tribe.

57.  Cash
equivalents, precious metal bullion and monetized bullion purchased by the
ultimate consumer, but coins or other forms of money for manufacture into
jewelry or works of art are subject to tax, and tangible personal property that
is purchased through the redemption of any cash equivalent by the holder as a
means of payment for goods that are subject to tax under this article is
subject to tax.  For the purposes of this paragraph:

(a)  "Cash
equivalents" means items, whether or not negotiable, that are sold to one
or more persons, through which a value denominated in money is purchased in
advance and that may be redeemed in full or in part for tangible personal
property, intangibles or services.  Cash equivalents include gift
cards, stored value cards, gift certificates, vouchers, traveler's checks,
money orders or other tangible instruments or orders. Cash equivalents do not
include either of the following:

(i)  Items
that are sold to one or more persons and through which a value is not
denominated in money.

(ii)  Prepaid
calling cards for telecommunications services. 

(b)  "Monetized
bullion" means coins and other forms of money that are manufactured from
gold, silver or other metals and that have been or are used as a medium of
exchange in this or another state, the United States or a foreign nation.

(c)  "Precious
metal bullion" means precious metal, including gold, silver, platinum,
rhodium and palladium, that has been smelted or refined so that its value
depends on its contents and not on its form.

B.  In
addition to the exemptions allowed by subsection A of this section, the
following categories of tangible personal property are also exempt:

1.  Machinery,
or equipment, used directly in manufacturing, processing, fabricating, job
printing, refining or metallurgical operations.  The terms
"manufacturing", "processing", "fabricating",
"job printing", "refining" and "metallurgical" as
used in this paragraph refer to and include those operations commonly
understood within their ordinary meaning.  "Metallurgical
operations" includes leaching, milling, precipitating, smelting and
refining.

2.  Machinery,
or equipment, used directly in the process of extracting ores or minerals from
the earth for commercial purposes, including equipment required to prepare the
materials for extraction and handling, loading or transporting such extracted
material to the surface.  "Mining" includes underground,
surface and open pit operations for extracting ores and minerals.

3.  Tangible
personal property sold to persons engaged in business classified under the
telecommunications classification under section 42‑5064, including a
person representing or working on behalf of such a person in a manner described
in section 42‑5075, subsection O, and consisting of central office
switching equipment, switchboards, private branch exchange equipment, microwave
radio equipment and carrier equipment including optical fiber, coaxial cable
and other transmission media that are components of carrier systems.

4.  Machinery,
equipment or transmission lines used directly in producing or transmitting
electrical power, but not including distribution. Transformers and control
equipment used at transmission substation sites constitute equipment used in
producing or transmitting electrical power.

5.  Neat
animals, horses, asses, sheep, ratites, swine or goats used or to be used as
breeding or production stock, including sales of breedings or ownership shares
in such animals used for breeding or production.

6.  Pipes
or valves four inches in diameter or larger used to transport oil, natural gas,
artificial gas, water or coal slurry, including compressor units, regulators,
machinery and equipment, fittings, seals and any other part that is used in
operating the pipes or valves.

7.  Aircraft,
navigational and communication instruments and other accessories and related
equipment sold to:

(a)  A
person:

(i)  Holding,
or exempted by federal law from obtaining, a federal certificate of public
convenience and necessity for use as, in conjunction with or becoming part of
an aircraft to be used to transport persons for hire in intrastate, interstate
or foreign commerce.

(ii)  That
is certificated or licensed under federal aviation regulations (14 Code of
Federal Regulations part 121 or 135) as a scheduled or unscheduled carrier of
persons for hire for use as or in conjunction with or becoming part of an
aircraft to be used to transport persons for hire in intrastate, interstate or foreign
commerce.

(iii)  Holding
a foreign air carrier permit for air transportation for use as or in
conjunction with or becoming a part of aircraft to be used to transport
persons, property or United States mail in intrastate, interstate or foreign
commerce.

(iv)  Operating
an aircraft to transport persons in any manner for compensation or hire
including as an air carrier, a foreign air carrier or a commercial operator or
under a restricted category, within the meaning of 14 Code of Federal Regulations,
regardless of whether the operation or aircraft is regulated or certified under
part 91, 119, 121, 133, 135, 136 or 137, or another part of 14 Code of Federal
Regulations.

(v)  That
will lease or otherwise transfer operational control, within the meaning of
federal aviation administration operations specification A008, or its
successor, of the aircraft, instruments or accessories to one or more persons
described in item (i), (ii), (iii) or (iv) of this subdivision, subject to
section 42-5009, subsection Q.

(b)  Any
foreign government.

(c)  Persons
who are not residents of this state and who will not use such property in this
state other than in removing such property from this state.  This
subdivision also applies to corporations that are not incorporated in this
state, regardless of maintaining a place of business in this state, if the
principal corporate office is located outside this state and the property will
not be used in this state other than in removing the property from this state.

8.  Machinery,
tools, equipment and related supplies used or consumed directly in repairing,
remodeling or maintaining aircraft, aircraft engines or aircraft component
parts by or on behalf of a certificated or licensed carrier of persons or
property.

9.  Rolling
stock, rails, ties and signal control equipment used directly to transport
persons or property.

10.  Machinery
or equipment used directly to drill for oil or gas or used directly in the
process of extracting oil or gas from the earth for commercial purposes.

11.  Buses
or other urban mass transit vehicles that are used directly to transport
persons or property for hire or pursuant to a governmentally adopted and
controlled urban mass transportation program and that are sold to bus companies
holding a federal certificate of convenience and necessity or operated by any
city, town or other governmental entity or by any person contracting with such
governmental entity as part of a governmentally adopted and controlled program
to provide urban mass transportation.

12.  Groundwater
measuring devices required under section 45‑604.

13.  New
machinery and equipment consisting of agricultural aircraft, tractors, tractor‑drawn
implements, self‑powered implements, machinery and equipment necessary
for extracting milk, and machinery and equipment necessary for cooling milk and
livestock, and drip irrigation lines not already exempt under paragraph 6 of
this subsection and that are used for commercial production of agricultural,
horticultural, viticultural and floricultural crops and products in this
state.  For the purposes of this paragraph:

(a)  "New
machinery and equipment" means machinery or equipment that has never been
sold at retail except pursuant to leases or rentals that do not total two years
or more.

(b)  "Self‑powered
implements" includes machinery and equipment that are electric‑powered.

14.  Machinery
or equipment used in research and development.  For the purposes of
this paragraph, "research and development" means basic and applied
research in the sciences and engineering, and designing, developing or testing
prototypes, processes or new products, including research and development of
computer software that is embedded in or an integral part of the prototype or
new product or that is required for machinery or equipment otherwise exempt
under this section to function effectively.  Research and development
do not include manufacturing quality control, routine consumer product testing,
market research, sales promotion, sales service, research in social sciences or
psychology, computer software research that is not included in the definition
of research and development, or other nontechnological activities or technical
services.

15.  Tangible
personal property that is used by either of the following to receive, store,
convert, produce, generate, decode, encode, control or transmit
telecommunications information:

(a)  Any
direct broadcast satellite television or data transmission service that
operates pursuant to 47 Code of Federal Regulations part 25.

(b)  Any
satellite television or data transmission facility, if both of the following
conditions are met:

(i)  Over
two‑thirds of the transmissions, measured in megabytes, transmitted by
the facility during the test period were transmitted to or on behalf of one or
more direct broadcast satellite television or data transmission services that
operate pursuant to 47 Code of Federal Regulations part 25.

(ii)  Over
two‑thirds of the transmissions, measured in megabytes, transmitted by or
on behalf of those direct broadcast television or data transmission services
during the test period were transmitted by the facility to or on behalf of
those services.

For the
purposes of subdivision (b) of this paragraph, "test period" means
the three hundred sixty‑five day period beginning on the later of the
date on which the tangible personal property is purchased or the date on which
the direct broadcast satellite television or data transmission service first
transmits information to its customers.

16.  Clean
rooms that are used for manufacturing, processing, fabrication or research and
development, as defined in paragraph 14 of this subsection, of semiconductor
products.  For the purposes of this paragraph, "clean room"
means all property that comprises or creates an environment where humidity,
temperature, particulate matter and contamination are precisely controlled
within specified parameters, without regard to whether the property is actually
contained within that environment or whether any of the property is affixed to
or incorporated into real property.  Clean room:

(a)  Includes
the integrated systems, fixtures, piping, movable partitions, lighting and all
property that is necessary or adapted to reduce contamination or to control
airflow, temperature, humidity, chemical purity or other environmental
conditions or manufacturing tolerances, as well as the production machinery and
equipment operating in conjunction with the clean room environment.

(b)  Does
not include the building or other permanent, nonremovable component of the building
that houses the clean room environment.

17.  Machinery
and equipment that are used directly in the feeding of poultry, the
environmental control of housing for poultry, the movement of eggs within a
production and packaging facility or the sorting or cooling of
eggs.  This exemption does not apply to vehicles used for
transporting eggs.

18.  Machinery
or equipment, including related structural components, that is employed in
connection with manufacturing, processing, fabricating, job printing, refining,
mining, natural gas pipelines, metallurgical operations, telecommunications,
producing or transmitting electricity or research and development and that is
used directly to meet or exceed rules or regulations adopted by the federal
energy regulatory commission, the United States environmental protection
agency, the United States nuclear regulatory commission, the Arizona department
of environmental quality or a political subdivision of this state to prevent,
monitor, control or reduce land, water or air pollution.

19.  Machinery
and equipment that are used in the commercial production of livestock,
livestock products or agricultural, horticultural, viticultural or
floricultural crops or products in this state, including production by a person
representing or working on behalf of such a person in a manner described in
section 42‑5075, subsection O, if the machinery and equipment are used
directly and primarily to prevent, monitor, control or reduce air, water or
land pollution.

20.  Machinery
or equipment that enables a television station to originate and broadcast or to
receive and broadcast digital television signals and that was purchased to
facilitate compliance with the telecommunications act of 1996 (P.L. 104‑104;
110 Stat. 56; 47 United States Code section 336) and the federal communications
commission order issued April 21, 1997 (47 Code of Federal Regulations part
73).  This paragraph does not exempt any of the following:

(a)  Repair
or replacement parts purchased for the machinery or equipment described in this
paragraph.

(b)  Machinery
or equipment purchased to replace machinery or equipment for which an exemption
was previously claimed and taken under this paragraph.

(c)  Any
machinery or equipment purchased after the television station has ceased analog
broadcasting, or purchased after November 1, 2009, whichever occurs first.

21.  Qualifying
equipment that is purchased from and after June 30, 2004 through June 30, 2024
by a qualified business under section 41‑1516 for harvesting or
processing qualifying forest products removed from qualifying projects as
defined in section 41‑1516.  To qualify for this exemption, the
qualified business must obtain and present its certification from the Arizona
commerce authority at the time of purchase.

C.  The
exemptions provided by subsection B of this section do not include:

1.  Expendable
materials.  For the purposes of this paragraph, expendable materials
do not include any of the categories of tangible personal property specified in
subsection B of this section regardless of the cost or useful life of that
property.

2.  Janitorial
equipment and hand tools.

3.  Office
equipment, furniture and supplies.

4.  Tangible
personal property used in selling or distributing activities, other than the
telecommunications transmissions described in subsection B, paragraph 15 of
this section.

5.  Motor
vehicles required to be licensed by this state, except buses or other urban
mass transit vehicles specifically exempted pursuant to subsection B, paragraph
11 of this section, without regard to the use of such motor vehicles.

6.  Shops,
buildings, docks, depots and all other materials of whatever kind or character
not specifically included as exempt.

7.  Motors
and pumps used in drip irrigation systems.

8.  Machinery
and equipment or tangible personal property used by a contractor in the
performance of a contract.

D.  The
following shall be deducted in computing the purchase price of electricity by a
retail electric customer from a utility business:

1.  Revenues
received from sales of ancillary services, electric distribution services,
electric generation services, electric transmission services and other services
related to providing electricity to a retail electric customer who is located
outside this state for use outside this state if the electricity is delivered
to a point of sale outside this state.

2.  Revenues
received from providing electricity, including ancillary services, electric
distribution services, electric generation services, electric transmission
services and other services related to providing electricity with respect to
which the transaction privilege tax imposed under section 42‑5063 has
been paid.

E.  The
tax levied by this article does not apply to the purchase of solar energy
devices from a retailer that is registered with the department as a solar
energy retailer or a solar energy contractor.

F.  The
following shall be deducted in computing the purchase price of electricity by a
retail electric customer from a utility business:

1.  Fees
charged by a municipally owned utility to persons constructing residential,
commercial or industrial developments or connecting residential, commercial or
industrial developments to a municipal utility system or systems if the fees
are segregated and used only for capital expansion, system enlargement or debt
service of the utility system or systems.

2.  Reimbursement
or contribution compensation to any person or persons owning a utility system
for property and equipment installed to provide utility access to, on or across
the land of an actual utility consumer if the property and equipment become the
property of the utility.  This deduction shall not exceed the value
of such property and equipment.

G.  The
tax levied by this article does not apply to the purchase price of electricity,
natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas by:

1.  A
qualified manufacturing or smelting business.  A utility that claims
this deduction shall report each month, on a form prescribed by the department,
the name and address of each qualified manufacturing or smelting business for
which this deduction is taken.  This paragraph applies to gas
transportation services.  For the purposes of this paragraph:

(a)  "Gas
transportation services" means the services of transporting natural gas to
a natural gas customer or to a natural gas distribution facility if the natural
gas was purchased from a supplier other than the utility.

(b)  "Manufacturing"
means the performance as a business of an integrated series of operations that
places tangible personal property in a form, composition or character different
from that in which it was acquired and transforms it into a different product
with a distinctive name, character or use.  Manufacturing does not
include job printing, publishing, packaging, mining, generating electricity
or operating a restaurant.

(c)  "Qualified
manufacturing or smelting business" means one of the following:

(i)  A
business that manufactures or smelts tangible products in this state, of which
at least fifty-one percent of the manufactured or smelted products will be
exported out of state for incorporation into another product or sold out of
state for a final sale.

(ii)  A
business that derives at least fifty‑one percent of its gross income from
the sale of manufactured or smelted products manufactured or smelted by the
business.

(iii)  A business that uses at least fifty‑one
percent of its square footage in this state for manufacturing or smelting and
business activities directly related to manufacturing or smelting.

(iv)  A
business that employs at least fifty-one percent of its workforce in this state
in manufacturing or smelting and business activities directly related to
manufacturing or smelting.

(v)  A
business that uses at least fifty-one percent of the value of its capitalized
assets in this state, as reflected on the business's books and records, for
manufacturing or smelting and business activities directly related to
manufacturing or smelting.

(d)  "Smelting"
means to melt or fuse a metalliferous mineral, often with an accompanying
chemical change, usually to separate the metal.

2.  A
business that operates an international operations center in this state and
that is certified by the Arizona commerce authority pursuant to section 41‑1520.

H.  Notwithstanding
subsections A and B of this section, the tangible personal property in the
following categories is not exempt for taxable periods beginning from and after
December 31, 2027:

1.  Subsection
A, paragraphs 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24,
26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 33, 35, 36, 37, 42, 43, 44, 48, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54 and 57
of this section.

2.  Subsection
B, paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19
and 20 of this section.

H.  I.  For the purposes of
subsection B of this section:

1.  "Agricultural
aircraft" means an aircraft that is built for agricultural use for the
aerial application of pesticides or fertilizer or for aerial seeding.

2.  "Aircraft"
includes:

(a)  An airplane flight
simulator that is approved by the federal aviation administration for use as a
phase II or higher flight simulator under appendix H, 14 Code of Federal
Regulations part 121.

(b)  Tangible
personal property that is permanently affixed or attached as a component part
of an aircraft that is owned or operated by a certificated or licensed carrier
of persons or property.

3.  "Other
accessories and related equipment" includes aircraft accessories and
equipment such as ground service equipment that physically contact aircraft at
some point during the overall carrier operation.

I.  j.  For the purposes of
subsection D of this section, "ancillary services", "electric
distribution service", "electric generation service",
"electric transmission service" and "other services" have
the same meanings prescribed in section 42‑5063. END_STATUTE

Sec. 16.  Conditional enactment

Sections
42-5061 and 42-5159, Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended by this act, do not
become effective unless Senate Bill 1010, fifty-third legislature, first
regular session, relating to multiple, defective and conflicting legislative
dispositions of statutory text, becomes law.

Sec. 17.  Requirements for
enactment; two-thirds vote

Pursuant to
article IX, section 22, Constitution of Arizona, this act is effective only on
the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the members of each house of the
legislature and is effective immediately on the signature of the governor or,
if the governor vetoes this act, on the subsequent affirmative vote of at least
three-fourths of the members of each house of the legislature.

