

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 8-821, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE8-821.  Taking
into temporary custody; medical examination; placement; interference;
violation; classification; definition

A.  A
child shall be taken into temporary custody only pursuant to one of the
following:

1.  An
order of the superior court. 

2.  Subsection
D of this section. 

3.  The
consent of the child's parent or guardian.

B.  The
superior court, on a dependency petition filed by an interested person, a peace
officer, a child welfare investigator or a child safety worker under oath or on
a sworn statement or testimony by a peace officer, a child welfare investigator
or a child safety worker, may issue an order authorizing the department to take
temporary custody of a child on finding that reasonable grounds exist probable cause exists to believe that temporary custody
is clearly necessary to protect the child from suffering abuse or neglect and
it is contrary to the child's welfare to remain in the home.  

C.  If
a child is taken into temporary custody pursuant to this section, the child's
sibling shall also be taken into temporary custody only if reasonable grounds
independently exist
independent
probable cause exists to
believe that temporary custody is clearly necessary to protect the child from
suffering abuse or neglect.

D.  A
child may be taken into temporary custody without a court order by a peace
officer, a child welfare investigator or a child safety worker if temporary
custody is clearly necessary to protect the child because exigent
circumstances exist.  probable cause exists to believe
that the child is either:

1.  A
victim or will imminently become a victim of abuse or neglect in the time it
would take to obtain a court order.

2.  Suffering
serious physical or emotional injury that can only be diagnosed by a medical
doctor or psychologist.

3.  Physically
injured as a result of living on premises where dangerous drugs or narcotic
drugs are being manufactured.  For the purposes of this paragraph, "dangerous
drugs" and "narcotic drugs" have the same meanings prescribed in
section 13‑3401.

4.  Reported
by the department to be a missing child at risk of serious harm.

E.  In
determining if a child should be taken into temporary custody, the court, peace
officer, child welfare investigator or child safety worker shall take into
consideration: 

1.  as a paramount concern
the child's health and safety.

2.  Whether
the parent is willing to participate in any services that are offered to the
parent.

F.  A
person who takes a child into custody pursuant to subsection D,
paragraph 2 because an exigent
circumstance described in subsection K, paragraph 2 of this section exists shall immediately have the child
examined by a medical
doctor or psychologist
physician
who is licensed pursuant to title 32, chapter 13 or 17 or a health care
provider who is licensed pursuant to title 32 and who has specific training in
evaluations of child abuse.  After
the examination the person shall release the child to the custody of the parent
or guardian of the child unless the examination reveals abuse or neglect.  Temporary custody of
a child taken into custody pursuant
to subsection D, paragraph 2
because
an exigent circumstance described in subsection K, paragraph 2 of this section exists shall not exceed twelve hours.

G.  A
child who is taken into temporary custody pursuant to this article shall not be
detained held in a police station, jail or
lockup where adults or
juveniles who are charged
with or convicted of a crime are detained.

H.  A
child shall not remain in temporary custody for more than seventy‑two
hours excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays unless a dependency petition is
filed.

I.  To
execute an order authorizing temporary custody, a peace officer may use
reasonable force to enter any building in which the person named in the removal
authorization is or is reasonably believed to be.

I.  J.  A person who knowingly
interferes with the taking of a child into temporary custody under this section
is guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 

K.  For
the purposes of this section, "Exigent circumstances" means there is
probable cause to believe that the child is likely to suffer serious harm in
the time it would take to obtain a court order for removal and either of the
following is true:

1.  there
is no less intrusive alternative to taking temporary custody of the child that
would reasonably and sufficiently protect the child's health or safety.

2.  Probable
cause exists to believe that the child is a victim of sexual abuse or abuse
involving serious physical injury that can be diagnosed only by a physician who
is licensed pursuant to title 32, chapter 13 or 17 or a health care provider
who is licensed pursuant to title 32 and who has specific training in
evaluations of child abuse.
END_STATUTE

