

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 32-3101, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-3101.  Definitions

In this
chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:

2.  1.  "Certification"
means a voluntary process by which a regulatory entity grants recognition to an
individual who has met certain prerequisite qualifications specified by that
regulatory entity and who may assume or use the word "certified" in a
title or designation to perform prescribed health professional tasks.

3.  2.  "Grandfather
clause" means a provision applicable to practitioners actively engaged in
the regulated health profession before the effective date of a law that exempts
the practitioners from meeting the prerequisite qualifications set forth in the
law to perform prescribed occupational tasks.

1.  3.  "Applicant Health professional group" means any health professional
group or organization, any individual or any other interested party that
proposes that any health professional group not presently regulated be
regulated or that proposes to increase the scope of practice of a health
profession.

4.  "Health
professions" means professions that are regulated
pursuant to chapter 7, 8, 11, 13, 14, 15, 15.1, 16, 17, 18, 19, 19.1, 21, 25,
28, 29, 33, 34, 35, 39 or 41 of this title, title 36, chapter 6, article 7 or
title 36, chapter 17.

5.  "Increase
the scope of practice" means to engage in conduct beyond the authority
granted to a health profession by law.

6.  "Inspection"
means the periodic examination of practitioners by a state agency in order to
ascertain whether the practitioners' occupation is being carried out in a
fashion consistent with the public health, safety and welfare.

7.  "Legislative
committees of reference" means joint subcommittees composed of the members
of the appropriate standing committees of the house of representatives and
senate appointed pursuant to section 41‑2954.

8.  7.  "Licensure"
or "license" means an individual, nontransferable authorization to
carry on a health activity that would otherwise be unlawful in this state in
the absence of the permission,  and that is based on
qualifications that include graduation from an accredited or approved program
and acceptable performance on a qualifying examination or a series of
examinations.

9.  8.  "Practitioner"
means an individual who has achieved knowledge and skill by practice and who is
actively engaged in a specified health profession.

10.  9.  "Public
member" means an individual who is not and never has been a member or
spouse of a member of the health profession being regulated and who does not
have and never has had a material financial interest in either the rendering of
the health professional service being regulated or an activity directly related
to the profession being regulated.

11.  10.  "Registration"
means the formal notification that, before rendering services, a practitioner
shall submit to a state agency setting forth the name and address of the
practitioner, the location, nature and operation of the health activity to be
practiced and, if required by a regulatory entity, a description of the service
to be provided.

12.  11.  "Regulatory
entity" means any board, commission, agency or department of this state
that regulates one or more health professions in this state.

13.  12.  "State
agency" means any department, board, commission or agency of this state. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 32-3103, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-3103.  Regulation
of health professions; legislation; criteria

A.  Regulation
shall not be imposed on any unregulated health profession except
for the purpose of prohibiting competition, but only for
the exclusive purpose of protecting the public interest.  All
proposed legislation to regulate a health profession for the first time shall
be reviewed according to the following criteria.  A health profession
shall be regulated by this state only if:

1.  There is credible evidence that the unregulated practice of that health profession can clearly harm or endanger the
public health, safety or welfare and the potential for harm is easily
recognizable and not remote or dependent on tenuous argument.

2.  The
public needs and can reasonably be expected to benefit from an assurance of
initial and continuing professional ability.

3.  The
public cannot be effectively protected by other means in a more cost
beneficial cost‑beneficial manner.

B.  After
evaluating the criteria prescribed in subsection A of this
section and considering governmental and societal costs and benefits, if
the legislature finds that it is necessary to regulate a health profession not
previously regulated by law, the legislature shall implement the
least restrictive alternative method of regulation shall be
implemented to address the specific harm or danger
identified, consistent with the public interest and the following:

1.  If
existing common law and statutory civil actions and criminal prohibitions are
not sufficient to eradicate existing harm, the regulation shall provide for
stricter civil actions and criminal prohibitions.

2.  If
a service is being performed for individuals which that involves a hazard to the public health, safety or welfare,
the regulation shall impose inspection requirements and enable an appropriate
state agency to enforce violations by injunctive relief in court.

3.  If
the threat to the public health, safety or economic well‑being is
relatively small as a result of the operation of the health profession, the
regulation shall implement a system of registration.

4.  If
the consumer may have a substantial basis for relying on the services of a
practitioner, the regulation shall implement a system of certification.

5.  If
it is apparent that adequate regulation cannot be achieved by means other than
licensing, the regulation shall implement a system of licensing. END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Section 32-3104, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-3104.  Health
professional groups; written report; legislative informational hearings;
proposed legislation

A.  Applicant groups A health
professional group shall submit a written report explaining the factors
prescribed in section 32‑3105 or 32‑3106 to the president of the
senate and the speaker of the house of representatives.  The report
shall be submitted on or before September
November 1 before the start of the legislative session for which the
legislation is proposed, and the health professional group may
request informational hearings pursuant to this section.  The
president of the senate or the speaker of the house of representatives shall
assign the written report to the appropriate legislative
committee of reference health committee of the house of
representatives and the health and human services committee of the senate, or
their respective successor committees, and the legislative committees may
conduct informational hearings on the written report before the legislative
session convenes.  The legislative committee of
reference report may be amended after it has been filed
but before any hearing on the report.  The committees shall study the
written report and deliver the report of its recommendations to
the speaker of the house of representatives, the president of the senate, the
governor and, if appropriate, the regulatory board of the health profession on
or before December 1 of the year in which the report is
submitted.  Legislative committees of reference may hold hearings as
they deem necessary. and may take public comment on the
report at the informational hearings but shall not vote whether to accept or
reject the report filed by the health professional group.  If
a health professional group proposes to increase the scope of practice of its
profession, the health professional group may send copies
of the written report shall be sent to the regulatory
board of the health profession and the department of health
services for review and comment.  If applicable, the
regulatory board of the health profession shall make recommendations based on
the report submitted by applicant groups to the extent requested by the
legislative committees of reference.  A health
professional group may seek to introduce legislation in the legislative session
regardless of comments, if any, from the informational hearings. 

B.  If
a health professional group's report is not heard by a legislative committee
pursuant to subsection A of this section, the health professional group may
seek to have legislation introduced in the legislative session for
certification, registration or licensure or to increase the scope of practice
of an existing regulated health profession. The lack of a hearing shall not be
considered as either support or rejection of the health professional group's
proposed legislation.

C.  Unless
there is a material change in the proposed increased scope of practice, a
health professional group is not required to refile a report if the health
professional group filed the report within the previous five years.  On or
before November 1, the health professional group shall notify in writing the
speaker of the house of representatives, the president of the senate and the
chairpersons of the respective health committees if the health professional
group intends to pursue the proposed increased scope of practice during the
next legislative session and shall reference the specific report that was
previously filed on which the health professional group is relying. END_STATUTE

Sec. 4.  Section 32-3105, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-3105.  Health
professional groups; proposed regulation; factors

Applicant
groups for
A health professional
group that is seeking regulation shall explain each of
the following factors to the extent requested by the legislative committees of reference:

1.  A definition of the problem and Why regulation is necessary, including:

(a)  The
nature of the potential harm to the public if the health profession is not
regulated and the extent to which there is a threat to public health and
safety.

(b)  The
extent to which consumers need and will benefit from a method of regulation, identifying competent practitioners and indicating typical
employers, if any, of practitioners in the health profession.

(c)  The
extent of autonomy a practitioner has, as indicated by the following:

(i)  The
extent to which the health profession calls for independent judgment and the
extent of skill or experience required in making the independent judgment.

(ii)  The
extent to which practitioners are supervised.

2.  The
efforts made to address the problem, including:

(a)  Voluntary
efforts, if any, by members of the health profession to either:

(i)  Establish
a code of ethics.

(ii)  Help
resolve disputes between health practitioners and consumers.

(b)  Recourse
to and the extent of use of applicable law and whether it could be amended to
control the problem.

3.  The
alternatives considered, including:

(a)  Regulation
of business employers or practitioners rather than employee practitioners.

(b)  Regulation
of the program or service rather than the individual practitioners.

(c)  Registration
of all practitioners.

(d)  Certification
of all practitioners.

(e)  Other
alternatives.

(f)  Why
the use of the alternatives specified in this paragraph would not be adequate
to protect the public interest.

(g)  Why
licensing would serve to protect the public interest.

4.  The
benefit to the public if regulation is granted,
including:

(a)  The
extent to which the incidence of specific problems present in the unregulated
health profession can reasonably be expected to be reduced by regulation.

(b)  Whether
the public can identify qualified practitioners.

(c)  The
extent to which the public can be confident that qualified practitioners are
competent, including:

(i)  Whether
the proposed regulatory entity would be a board composed of members of the
profession and public members or a state agency, or both, and, if appropriate,
their respective responsibilities in administering the system of registration,
certification or licensure, including the composition of the board and the
number of public members, if any, the powers and duties of the board or state
agency regarding examinations and for cause revocation, suspension and
nonrenewal of registrations, certificates or licenses, the adoption of rules
and canons of ethics, the conduct of inspections, the receipt of complaints and
disciplinary action taken against practitioners and how fees would be levied
and collected to pay for the expenses of administering and operating the
regulatory system.

(ii)  If
there is a grandfather clause, whether grandfathered practitioners will be
required to meet the prerequisite qualifications established by the regulatory
entity at a later date. 

(iii)  The
nature of the standards proposed for registration, certification or licensure
as compared with the standards of other jurisdictions.

(iv)  Whether
the regulatory entity would be authorized to enter into reciprocity agreements
with other jurisdictions.

(v)  The
nature and duration of any training, including whether
the training includes a substantial amount of supervised field experience,
whether training programs exist in this state, if there will be an experience
requirement, whether the experience must be acquired under a registered,
certified or licensed practitioner, whether there are alternative routes of
entry or methods of meeting the prerequisite qualifications, whether all
applicants will be required to pass an examination, and if an examination is
required, by whom it will be developed and how the costs of development will be
met.

(d)  Assurance
of the public that practitioners have maintained their competence, including:

(i)  Whether
the registration, certification or licensure will carry an expiration date.

(ii)  Whether
renewal will be based only on payment of a fee or whether renewal will involve
reexamination, peer review or other enforcement.

5.  The
extent to which regulation might harm the public,
including:

(a)  The
extent to which regulation will restrict entry into the health profession, including:

(i)  Whether
the proposed standards are more restrictive than necessary to ensure safe and
effective performance.

(ii)  Whether
the proposed legislation requires registered, certified or licensed
practitioners in other jurisdictions who migrate relocate to this state to qualify in the same manner as state
applicants for registration, certification and licensure if the other
jurisdiction has substantially equivalent requirements for registration,
certification or licensure as those in this state.

(b)  Whether
there are professions similar to that of the applicant health professional group which that should be included in, or portions of the applicant health professional group which that should be excluded from, the proposed legislation.

6.  The
maintenance of standards, including:

(a)  Whether
effective quality assurance standards exist in the health profession, such as
legal requirements associated with specific programs that define or enforce
standards or a code of ethics.

(b)  How
the proposed legislation will assure ensure
quality, including:

(i)  The
extent to which a code of ethics, if any, will be adopted.

(ii)  The
grounds for suspension or revocation of registration, certification or
licensure.

7.  A
description of the group proposed for regulation, including a list of
associations, organizations and other groups representing the practitioners in
this state, an estimate of the number of practitioners in each group and
whether the groups represent different levels of practice.

8.  The
expected costs of regulation, including:

(a)  The
impact that registration, certification or licensure will
have on the costs of the services to the public.

(b)  The
cost to this state and to the general public of
implementing the proposed legislation. END_STATUTE

Sec. 5.  Section 32-3106, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-3106.  Health
professional groups; proposed increased scope of practice; factors; legislation

A.  Applicant groups for A health
professional group that is seeking an increased scope of practice shall explain each of
the following factors to the extent requested by the legislative
committee of reference:

1.  A definition of the problem and Why a change in
an increased scope of practice is necessary beneficial, including the extent to which health
care consumers need and will benefit from safe, quality
care from practitioners with this scope of practice.

2.  The
extent to which the public can be confident that qualified practitioners are
competent including:

(a)  Evidence
that the profession's regulatory board has functioned adequately in protecting
the public.

(b)  Whether
effective quality assurance standards exist in the health profession, such as
legal requirements associated with specific programs that define or endorse
standards or a code of ethics.

(c)  Evidence
that state approved educational programs provide or are willing to provide core
curriculum adequate to prepare practitioners at the proposed level.

2.  Whether
those health professionals seeking an increased scope of practice currently
have or will be required to have didactic and clinical education from
accredited professional schools or training from recognized programs that
prepare them to perform the proposed scope of practice, and details on what
that education or training includes for that proposed scope of practice.

3.  Whether the subject matter of the
proposed increased scope of practice is currently tested by nationally
recognized and accepted examinations for applicants for professional licensure
and the details of the examination relating to the increased scope of practice.

3.  4.  The extent to which an increase in the proposed increased scope
of practice may harm the public including the extent to which an
increased scope of practice will restrict entry into practice and whether the
proposed legislation requires registered, certified or licensed practitioners
in other jurisdictions who migrate to this state to qualify in the same manner
as state applicants for registration, certification and licensure if the other
jurisdiction has substantially equivalent requirements for registration,
certification or licensure as those in this state will
impact the practice of those who are currently licensed in this state or the
entry into practice of those individuals who have relocated from other states
with substantially equivalent requirements for registration, certification or
licensure as this state.

4.  5.  The extent
to which implementing the proposed increased scope of practice may result in
savings or a cost to this state and to the general
public of implementing the proposed increase in scope of practice.


6.  The
relevant health profession licensure laws, if any, in this or other states.

7.  Recommendations,
if any, from the applicable regulatory entity or entities, from the department
of health services and from accredited educational or training programs.

B.  The
legislature shall review any legislation to increase the scope of practice
according to the following criteria:

1.  Any
limit on a health profession's scope of practice must be only for the purpose
of protecting the public from a specific harm or danger.

2.  Whether
the addition of adequately trained health professionals providing an expanded
range of professional health care services will have a beneficial effect to the
public and increase access to safe, quality care.

3.  Whether
any changes in the health profession's regulatory entity are necessary to
adequately protect the public.

C.  The
legislature shall not consider either of the following in its review of
legislation to increase the scope of practice:

1.  Competition
from or with other licensed professions.

2.  The
ability or inability to obtain health insurance coverage for the proposed
increased scope of practice. END_STATUTE

Sec. 6.  Section 32-4402, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE32-4402.  Applicant
groups; nonhealth professions and occupations; written report

Applicant
groups shall submit a written report explaining the factors prescribed in
section 32‑4403 to the president of the senate and the speaker of the
house of representatives.  The report shall be submitted on or before
September 1 before the start of the legislative session for which the
legislation is proposed.  The president of the senate or the speaker
of the house of representatives shall assign the written report to the
appropriate legislative committee of reference.  The legislative
committee of reference shall study the written report and deliver the report of
its recommendations to the speaker of the house of representatives, the
president of the senate, the governor and, if appropriate, the regulatory
entity on or before December 1 the third
Friday in January of the year following the year in
which the report is submitted.  Legislative committees of reference may hold
hearings as they deem necessary. END_STATUTE

Sec. 7.  Section 41-2952, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-2952.  Definitions

In
this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:

1.  "Agency"
means any department, office, agency, commission, board or other
instrumentality of this state specified in article 2 of this chapter regardless
of whether monies are appropriated to such board.

2.  "Committee"
means the joint legislative audit committee.

3.  "Committee
of reference" means a joint subcommittee which is composed
of the members of the appropriate standing committees
committee of the house of representatives and
or senate and which that
is appointed for the purpose of evaluating agencies subject to
termination pursuant to this chapter.

4.  "Special
performance audit" means a performance audit of limited scope.

5.  "Sunset
review" means a systematic evaluation by the committee of reference under
the supervision of the joint legislative audit committee, with the assistance of
the appropriate agency, joint legislative budget committee, committees of
reference, auditor general and support staff, to determine if the merits of the
program justify its continuation rather than termination, or its continuation
at a level less than or greater than the existing level.  Such review
shall be undertaken in the scope and detail the committee of reference deems
appropriate and shall include, without limitation, whether there is a need for
the program in state government and, if so, an assessment of the degree to
which the original objectives of the program have been achieved expressed in
terms of the performance, impact or accomplishments of the program and of the
situation it was intended to address.  Such review shall be coordinated
with the performance audit procedures of the auditor general as set forth in
chapter 7, article 10.1 of this title or of the committees of reference,
whichever is appropriate.

6.  "Terminate"
or "termination" means the date provided for termination of legislative
authority for the existence of a particular agency pursuant to article 2 of
this chapter. END_STATUTE

Sec. 8.  Section 41-2954, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-2954.  Committees
of reference; performance review reports; hearings; recommendations; subpoena
powers

A.  Each
standing committee of both legislative houses shall appoint a
subcommittee of five members.  Not more than three appointees of each
house shall be of the same political party.  The subcommittees shall
jointly constitute a committee of reference in their
the committee's respective subject matter areas and the committee's respective house.

B.  After
receipt of the preliminary sunset review report, the each committee of reference or each committee of
reference meeting jointly shall hold at least one public hearing when the legislature is not in session or before the third Friday in
January to receive testimony from the public and from the officials of
the agency involved.  The agency involved shall prepare a presentation for the
first public meeting that addresses the elements of the written statement
required by subsection F of this section.

C.  The Each committee of reference shall hold
public hearings for the following purposes:

1.  To
determine the actual need of the agency to regulate or direct the particular
activity.

2.  To
determine the extent to which the statutory requirements of the agency are
necessary and are being met.

3.  To
receive testimony from the public as to the relationship of the agency with the
public.

4.  To
receive testimony from the executive director or other head of the agency as to
reasons for the continuation of the agency.

D.  The Each committee of reference shall
consider but not be limited to the following factors in determining the need
for continuation or termination of each agency:

1.  The
objective and purpose in establishing the agency and the extent to which the
objective and purpose are met by private enterprises in other states.

2.  The
extent to which the agency has met its statutory objective and purpose and the
efficiency with which it has operated.

3.  The
extent to which the agency serves the entire state rather than specific
interests.

4.  The
extent to which rules adopted by the agency are consistent with the legislative
mandate.

5.  The
extent to which the agency has encouraged input from the public before adopting
its rules and the extent to which it has informed the public as to its actions
and their the expected impact on the
public.

6.  The
extent to which the agency has been able to investigate and resolve complaints
that are within its jurisdiction.

7.  The
extent to which the attorney general or any other applicable agency of state
government has the authority to prosecute actions under the enabling
legislation.

8.  The
extent to which agencies have addressed deficiencies in their enabling statutes
that prevent them from fulfilling their statutory mandate.

9.  The
extent to which changes are necessary in the laws of the agency to adequately
comply with the factors listed in this subsection.

10.  The
extent to which the termination of the agency would significantly affect the
public health, safety or welfare.

11.  The
extent to which the level of regulation exercised by the agency compares to
other states and is appropriate and whether less or more stringent levels of
regulation would be appropriate.

12.  The
extent to which the agency has used private contractors in the performance of
its duties as compared to other states and how more effective use of private
contractors could be accomplished.

13.  The
extent to which the agency potentially creates unexpected negative consequences
that might require additional review by the committee of reference, including
increasing the price of goods, affecting the availability of services, limiting
the abilities of individuals and businesses to operate efficiently and
increasing the cost of government.

E.  The
committee of reference shall deliver the final sunset review report of its
recommendations to the committee, the president of the senate,
the speaker of the house of representatives, the governor, the auditor general
and the affected agency by December 1 on or
before the third Friday in January.  Such recommendations
shall include one of the following:

1.  That
the state agency be continued.

2.  That
the state agency be revised or consolidated.

3.  That
the state agency be terminated pursuant to this chapter.

F.  The
final sunset review report by the each committee
of reference shall also include a written statement prepared by the agency
involved that contains:

1.  An
identification of the problem or the needs that the agency is intended to
address.

2.  A
statement, to the extent practicable, in quantitative and qualitative terms, of
the objectives of such agency and its anticipated accomplishments.

3.  An
identification of any other agencies having similar, conflicting or duplicate
objectives, and an explanation of the manner in which the agency avoids
duplication or conflict with other such agencies.

4.  An
assessment of the consequences of eliminating the agency or of consolidating it
with another agency.

G.  The each committee of
reference shall oversee the preparation of any proposed legislation to
implement the recommendations of the committees that committee of reference and is responsible for the
introduction of such legislation.

H.  If
an agency is continued, it is not necessary to reappoint any member of the
governing board or commission of the agency.  Such members are
eligible to complete their original terms without reappointment or
reconfirmation.

I.  Each
committee of reference shall have the power of legislative subpoena pursuant to
chapter 7, article 4 of this title. END_STATUTE

