

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 28-6705, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE28-6705.  Public
road and street maintenance

A.  The
board of supervisors may spend public monies for maintenance of public roads
and streets other than legally designated state and county highways located
without the limits of an incorporated city or town.  Before spending
public monies under this section, the roads or streets shall be both either:

1.  Laid
out, opened and constructed in accordance with standard engineering road
specifications adopted by the board of supervisors without cost to the county.

2.  Completed
pursuant to a plat that
is approved
pursuant to sections 11‑802 and 11‑822 and in accordance with standard
engineering road specifications adopted by the board of supervisors to ensure
uniform compliance.

B.  The
board of supervisors may spend public monies for maintenance of public roads
and streets that were laid out, constructed and opened before June 13, 1990, or that have been
designated as primitive roads pursuant to section 28‑6706, subsection D, even if the roads and streets
were not constructed in accordance with subsection A of this section.

C.  Maintenance
of a public road or street does not include purchasing or laying
cement.  To reduce long‑term maintenance costs for maintenance
authorized by this section, the board of supervisors may spend monies to add
rock products, gravel and processed materials to the base of the roads and
streets.  Petroleum based or nonpetroleum based products may be used in the
maintenance and repair of unpaved roads, alleys and shoulders identified
pursuant to section 9‑500.04 or 49‑474.01 or unpaved roads, alleys
and shoulders in any county where the control officer as defined in section 49‑471
certifies to the board of supervisors that emissions from such roads, alleys or
shoulders may endanger compliance with the national ambient air quality standard
as defined in section 49‑401.01. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 28-6706, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE28-6706.  Primitive
roads

A.  The
board of supervisors or the governing body of a city or town may designate a
public road within its jurisdiction as a primitive road as prescribed in this
section.

B.  Neither
a county, city or town nor its employees are liable for damages or injuries resulting
from the use of a primitive road designated under this section except for
intentional injuries or gross negligence caused by an employee acting within
the scope of the employee's employment.

C.  Except as provided
in subsection D,
The board of supervisors or the governing body of a city or town shall not
designate a road as a primitive road unless it was opened before June 13, 1975 1990 and was not constructed in
accordance with county standards.

D.  The
board of supervisors or the governing body of a city or town may designate a
road as a primitive road if all of the following apply:

1.  The
road was opened after June 13, 1975.

2.  The
road was accepted for maintenance by the board of supervisors or the governing
body of a city or town before June 13, 1985.

3.  The
road was not constructed in accordance with county standards.

E.  D.  The county, city or town shall
place signs on every road designated as a primitive road in locations adequate
to warn the public.  These signs shall state "Primitive road,
caution, use at your own risk.  This surface is not regularly
maintained."

F.  E.  A board of supervisors or the
governing body of a city or town shall not designate a state or county highway
as a primitive road. END_STATUTE

