

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 28-7902, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE28-7902.  Outdoor
advertising authorized

A.  The
following outdoor advertising may be placed or maintained along an interstate,
secondary or primary system within six hundred sixty feet of the edge of the
right‑of‑way:

1.  Directional
or other official signs or notices that are required or authorized by law,
including signs pertaining to natural wonders and scenic and historic
attractions.

2.  Signs,
displays and devices that are located on the premises of the activity that they
advertise.  This paragraph applies to any sign that is located on the premises
of a comprehensive development that the sign advertises if the placement of the
sign does not cause a reduction of federal aid highway monies pursuant to 23
United States Code section 131.  For the purposes of this paragraph,
"activity" means the active use or collective uses of the premises.

3.  Signs,
displays and devices advertising the sale or lease of the property on which
they are located.

4.  Signs,
displays and devices lawfully placed after April 1, 1970 in business areas.

5.  Signs,
displays and devices lawfully placed after either:

(a)  July
1, 1974 in zoned or unzoned commercial or industrial areas inside municipal
limits.

(b)  April
1, 1972 in unzoned commercial or industrial areas outside municipal limits.

6.  Signs,
displays and devices that are lawfully existing on April 1, 1970 and that
are located in business areas and in zoned commercial or industrial areas
outside municipal limits.

7.  Signs,
displays and devices lawfully existing on either:

(a)  July
1, 1974 that are located in zoned or unzoned commercial or industrial areas
inside municipal limits.

(b)  April
1, 1972 in unzoned commercial or industrial areas outside municipal limits.

8.  Nonconforming
tourist related advertising displays that are lawfully erected and in existence
on May 5, 1976, that are located in defined hardship areas, that provide
specific directional information to the traveling public and that are approved
by the United States secretary of transportation pursuant to 23 United States
Code section 131(o).

9.  A
sign located in a charter city adjacent to an interstate highway with a
changing message for identification of businesses that are located on separate
contiguous parcels and that are part of a single development approved by a city
council as part of a development agreement entered into before April 22, 1990. 
The changing message may not contain words or phrases that continuously travel
or scroll in a manner that presents a message longer than may be displayed on
the sign at one instant in time.  The director may adopt rules
governing the interval within which a message may be displayed or changed.  This
paragraph does not alter, change or affect any other statute, rule, regulation,
policy or interpretation concerning the use of signs with changing messages or
the ownership of property on which the signs are located.

B.  Outdoor
advertising authorized under subsection A, paragraphs 1, 4 and 5 shall conform
with standards contained and shall bear permits required in rules adopted by
the director under this article, except that the authorized outdoor advertising
along highways in the secondary system that are not state highways need only
bear permits required by the responsible county or municipal authority.

C.  Outdoor
advertising authorized under subsection A, paragraphs 6 and 7 need not conform
to standards contained but shall bear permits required in rules adopted by the
director under this article, except that the authorized outdoor advertising
along highways in the secondary system that are not state highways need only
bear permits required by the responsible county or municipal authority.

D.  If
preservation would be consistent with this article, signs may be preserved or
maintained if they were lawfully in existence on October 22, 1965 and if the
director determines, subject to the approval of the United States secretary of
transportation as provided for by 23 United States Code section 131(c), that
they are landmark signs, including signs on farm structures or natural
surfaces, of historic or artistic significance.

E.  Outdoor
advertising that conforms to standards and bears a permit pursuant to
subsection B or C of this section may include electronic outdoor advertising
only if the electronic outdoor advertising meets the following requirements:

1.  The
electronic outdoor advertising does not contain any form of animation and
remains static for at least eight seconds with a transition time of no greater
than two seconds.

2.  Except
as provided in subsection H or I of this section, the electronic outdoor
advertising is located within the area with the following coordinates:

Beginning
at 2121 South Casino Drive in Laughlin, Nevada, 89029, to all
points within this state that are within a radius of sixty miles from such
address on Casino drive, and also including latitude 33.9 north,
longitude 114.5 west, hence due east to latitude 33.9 north, longitude 112.25
west, hence following the circumference of a circle with a radius of seventy‑five
miles from the coordinates of the discovery channel telescope to latitude 33.66
north, longitude 111.23 west, hence due south to latitude 33.46 north,
longitude 111.23 west, hence following the circumference of a circle with a
radius of seventy‑five miles from the coordinates of the Mount Lemmon
observatory to latitude 33.02 north, longitude 111.91 west, hence following the
circumference of a circle with a radius of seventy‑five miles from the
coordinates of Kitt Peak observatory to latitude 32.6 north, longitude 112.65
west, hence due west to latitude 32.6 north, longitude 114.802 west, and hence
north along the Colorado river to the point of beginning.

3.  Except as provided
in paragraph 4 of this subsection,
from sunset until 11:00 P.M., the dimmer for electronic outdoor advertising
signs, displays and devices shall not be set to exceed three hundred forty‑two
NITS in full white mode for signs that are smaller than six hundred seventy‑two
square feet in area and three hundred NITS in full white mode for signs that
are equal to or larger than six hundred seventy‑two square feet in area.

4.  For
coordinates beginning at 2121 South Casino Drive in Laughlin, Nevada, 89029, to
all points within this state that are within a radius of sixty miles from such
address on Casino Drive from sunset until 11:00 P.M., the dimmer for electronic
outdoor advertising signs, displays and devices shall not be set to exceed two
hundred fifty‑five NITS in full white mode for all signs.

4.  5.  From 11:00 P.M. until
sunrise, illumination shall be extinguished and electronic outdoor advertising
signs, displays and devices shall be equipped with an automatic device to
ensure compliance with this paragraph, except for amber alerts and other
governmental emergencies.  The automatic device shall have the
ability to dim the display through a photoelectric sensor that detects ambient
light levels and adjusts the display intensity automatically to ensure the
maximum NIT levels are enforced.

5.  6.  The electronic outdoor advertising
shall comply with the size and spacing limitations prescribed in section 28‑7905, except that for
coordinates beginning at 2121 South Casino Drive in Laughlin, Nevada, 89029, to
all points within this state that are within a radius of sixty miles from such
address on Casino Drive, the number of electronic outdoor advertising signs,
displays and devices shall not exceed fifty.

F.  The
director shall prepare a pictorial representation of the coordinates described
in subsection E, paragraph 2 of this section.  The director shall
post the pictorial representation on the department's website.

G.  The
owner of any outdoor advertising that is within the area described in
subsection E, paragraph 2 of this section, that bears a permit pursuant to
subsection B or C of this section and that is converted to electronic outdoor
advertising shall notify the department of the face‑type status
change.  The notice shall include a certification that the sign
remains in compliance with this section.  The department shall maintain the
face-type status change documents in its records.  After the effective date of this
amendment to this section May 9, 2012, the conversion of outdoor advertising to electronic
outdoor advertising is only allowed in the area described in subsection E,
paragraph 2 of this section.

H.  Electronic
outdoor advertising is deemed to have legal nonconforming status for the
purposes of state law, including for the purposes of any permits and approvals
issued by the department, if both of the following apply:

1.  The
electronic outdoor advertising is both operational and bears a permit pursuant
to subsection B or C of this section before the effective date of this
amendment to this section May 9, 2012.

2.  The
electronic outdoor advertising is not located within the area described in
subsection E, paragraph 2 of this section.

I.  Electronic
outdoor advertising in existence and operational as of the effective date of this
amendment to this section
May 9,
2012 is deemed
to have legal conforming status for the purposes of state law, including for
the purposes of any permits and approvals issued by the department if both of
the following apply:

1.  The
electronic outdoor advertising bears a permit pursuant to subsection B or C of
this section.

2.  The
electronic outdoor advertising is located within the area described in
subsection E, paragraph 2 of this section.

J.  The
electronic outdoor advertising that is described in subsection H or I of this
section is subject to the requirements prescribed by subsection E, paragraphs
1, 3, 4 and 5.

K.  A
city, town or county shall not issue a permit for conversion of an existing
outdoor advertising use to an electronic outdoor advertising use after the effective date
of this amendment to this section
May 9,
2012 if the
existing outdoor advertising is not located in the area described in subsection
E, paragraph 2 of this section.

L.  This
section does not prevent a city, town or county from enforcing or enacting an
ordinance regulating outdoor advertising that is authorized by subsection E of
this section, including the lighting of the outdoor advertising.  The city, town
or county may enact an ordinance that is more restrictive than this section but
not less restrictive than this section. END_STATUTE

