

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 15-213.01, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE15-213.01.  Procurement
practices; guaranteed energy cost savings contracts; definitions

A.  Notwithstanding
section 15‑213, subsection A, a school district may contract for the
procurement of a guaranteed energy cost savings contract with a qualified
provider through a competitive sealed proposal process as provided by the
procurement practices adopted by the state board of education.

B.  A
school district may enter into a guaranteed energy cost savings contract with a
qualified provider if it determines that the energy savings project pays for
itself within the expected life, according to the manufacturer's equipment
standards, of the energy cost savings measures implemented, the term of the
financial agreement or twenty‑five years, whichever is shortest, if the
recommendations in the proposal are followed.  The school district
shall retain the cost savings achieved by a guaranteed energy cost saving savings contract, and these cost
savings may be used to pay for the contract and project implementation.  

C.  The
school district shall use objective criteria in selecting the qualified
provider, including the cost of the contract, the energy cost savings, the net
projected energy savings, the quality of the technical approach, the quality of
the project management plan, the financial solvency of the qualified provider
and the experience of the qualified provider with projects of similar size and
scope.  The school district shall set forth each criterion with its
respective numerical weighting in the request for proposal.

D.  In
selecting a contractor to perform any construction work related to performing
the guaranteed energy cost savings contract, the qualified provider may develop
and use a prequalification process for contractors.  These
prequalifications may require the contractor to demonstrate that the contractor
is adequately bonded to perform the work and that the contractor has not failed
to perform on a prior job. 

E.  A
study shall be performed by the selected qualified provider in order to
establish the exact scope of the guaranteed energy cost savings contract, the
fixed cost savings guarantee amount and the methodology for determining actual
savings.  This report shall be reviewed and approved by the school
district before the actual installation of any equipment.  The
qualified provider shall transmit a copy of the approved study to the school
facilities board and the governor's office of energy policy.

F.  The
guaranteed energy cost savings contract shall require that, in determining
whether the projected energy savings calculations have been met, the energy
savings shall be computed by comparing the energy baseline before installation
or implementation of the energy cost savings measures with the energy consumed
after installation or implementation of the energy cost savings
measures.  The qualified provider and the school district may agree
to make modifications to the energy baseline only for any of the following:

1.  Changes
in utility rates.

2.  Changes
in the number of days in the utility billing cycle.

3.  Changes
in the square footage of the facility.

4.  Changes
in the operational schedule of the facility.

5.  Changes
in facility temperature.

6.  Significant
changes in the weather.

7.  Significant
changes in the amount of equipment or lighting utilized used in the facility.

8.  Significant
changes in the nature or intensity of energy use, such as
the change of classroom space to laboratory space.

G.  The
information to develop the energy baseline shall be derived from historical
energy costs or actual energy measurements or shall be calculated from energy
measurements at the facility where energy cost savings measures are to be
installed or implemented.  The baseline shall be established before
the installation or implementation of energy cost savings measures.

H.  At
the qualified provider's expense, the proposal shall include an independent
third‑party validation of cost savings calculations associated with each
proposed energy cost savings measure by a licensed, registered professional
engineer, with credentials from the national association of energy engineers,
who has demonstrated experience in energy analysis.  The school
district must approve the selection of the credentialed engineer.

I.  A
school district, or two or more school districts, may enter into a financing
agreement with a qualified provider or the financial institution, trustee or
paying agent for the purchase and installation or implementation of energy cost
savings measures.  The guaranteed energy cost savings contract may
provide for payments over a period of not more than the expected life,
according to the manufacturer's equipment standards, of the energy cost savings
measures implemented, the term of the financial agreement or twenty‑five
years, whichever is shortest.  The contract shall provide that all
payments, except obligations on termination of the contract before its
expiration, shall be made pursuant to the terms of the financing
agreement.  If a school district purchases the energy cost savings
measure, the qualified provider shall guarantee that the energy cost savings
meet or exceed the school district's total cost of the energy savings project
purchase.

J.  The
guaranteed energy cost savings contract shall include a written guarantee of
the qualified provider that the energy savings will meet or exceed the costs of
the energy cost savings measures over the expected life, according to the
manufacturer's equipment standards, of the energy cost savings measures
implemented, the term of the financial agreement or twenty‑five years,
whichever is shortest.  The qualified provider shall:

1.  For
the term of the guaranteed energy cost savings contract,
prepare a measurement and verification report on an annual basis in addition to
an annual reconciliation of savings.

2.  Reimburse
the school district for any shortfall of guaranteed energy cost savings on an
annual basis.

3.  Use
the international performance and measurement and verification protocol
standards or the federal energy management program standards to validate the
savings guarantee.

K.  The
school district may obtain any required financing as part of the original
competitive sealed proposal process from the qualified provider or a
third-party financing institution.

L.  A
qualified provider that is awarded the contract shall give a sufficient bond to
the school district for its faithful performance of the equipment installment.

M.  The
qualified provider is required to make public the information
in the subcontractor's bids only if the qualified provider is awarded the
guaranteed energy cost savings contract by the school district.

N.  For
all projects carried out under this section, the district shall report to the
governor's office of energy policy and the school facilities
board:

1.  The
name of the project.

2.  The
name of the qualified provider.

3.  The
total cost of the project.

4.  The
expected energy cost savings and relevant escalators.

5.  The
agreed on agreed‑on baseline
in the measurement and verification agreement in both kilowatt hours and
dollars.

O.  For
all projects carried out under this section, the district shall report to the
school facilities board, by October 15 each year, the actual energy cost
savings.

P.  O.  This
section does not apply to the construction of new buildings.

Q.  P.  A
school district may utilize use a
simplified energy performance contract for projects that are less
than five hundred thousand dollars.  Simplified energy performance
contracts are not required to include an energy savings guarantee and shall
comply with all requirements in this section except for the requirements that
are specifically related to the energy savings guarantee and the measurement
and verification of the guaranteed savings.

R.  Q.  For
the purposes of this section:

1.  "Construction"
means the process of building, altering, repairing, improving or demolishing
any school district structure or building, or other public improvements of any
kind to any school district real property.  Construction does not
include the routine operation, routine repair or routine maintenance of
existing structures, buildings or real property.

2.  "Energy
baseline" means a calculation of the amount of energy used in an existing
facility before the installation or implementation of the energy cost savings
measures.

3.  "Energy
cost savings measure" means a training program or facility alteration
designed to reduce energy consumption and may include one or more of the
following, and any related meters or other measuring devices:

(a)  Insulating
the building structure or systems in the building.

(b)  Storm
windows or doors, caulking or weather stripping, multiglazed windows or door
systems, additional glazing, reductions in glass area, or other window and door
system modifications that reduce energy consumption.

(c)  Automated
or computerized energy control systems.

(d)  Heating,
ventilating or air conditioning system modifications or replacements, including
geothermal.

(e)  Replacing
or modifying lighting fixtures to increase the energy efficiency of the
lighting system without increasing the overall illumination of a facility
unless an increase in illumination is necessary to conform to the applicable
state or local building code for the lighting system after the proposed
modifications are made.

(f)  Indoor
air quality improvements to increase air quality that conform to the applicable
state or local building code requirements.

(g)  Energy
recovery systems.

(h)  Installing
a new or retrofitting an existing day lighting system.

(i)  Procurement
of low-cost utility supplies of all types, including electricity, natural gas,
propane and water.

(j)  Devices
that reduce water consumption and water costs or that reduce sewer charges.

(k)  Rainwater
harvesting systems.

(l)  Combined
heat and power systems.

(m)  Renewable
and alternative energy projects and renewable energy power service agreements.

(n)  Self-generation
systems.

(o)  Any
additional building systems and infrastructure that produce energy, or that
provide utility cost savings not specifically mentioned in this paragraph, if
the improvements meet the life cycle life‑cycle
cost requirement and enhance building system performance or occupant comfort
and safety, excluding those systems that fall under section 15‑213.02.

(p)  Geothermal.

4.  "Guaranteed
energy cost savings contract" means a contract for implementing one or
more energy cost savings measures.

5.  "Life cycle Life‑cycle cost"
means the sum of present values of investment costs, capital costs,
installation costs, energy costs, operating costs, maintenance costs and
disposal costs and utility rebates over the life of the project, product or
measure as provided by federal life cycle life‑cycle
cost rules, regulations and criteria contained in the United States department
of energy federal energy management program "guidance on life‑cycle
cost analysis" required by executive order 13423, January 2007.

6.  "Qualified
provider" means a person or a business that is experienced in designing,
implementing or installing energy cost savings measures, that has a record of
established projects or measures of similar size and scope, that has
demonstrated technical, operational, financial and managerial capabilities to
design and operate energy cost savings measures and
projects and that has the financial ability to satisfy guarantees for energy
cost savings. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 15-910.02, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE15-910.02.  Energy
and water savings accounts

A.  Each
school district may establish an energy and water savings account that consists
of a designated pool of capital investment monies to fund energy or water
saving projects in school facilities.  A school district may deposit
in the account monies generated from the energy or water savings projects or
measures implemented in school facilities.  A school district may use
monies in the energy and water savings account for payments under a performance
contract entered into pursuant to section 15‑213 or 15‑213.01.

B.  The
auditor general and the department of education shall prescribe the appropriate
designation of the energy and water savings accounts in the uniform system of
financial records and shall prescribe reporting requirements on the appropriate
budget forms and annual financial report forms.

C.  Monies
deposited in an energy and water savings account shall be used as a designated
pool of capital investment monies to pay for the incremental cost of energy or
water savings measures in school facilities that are owned by the school
district.  Any contract entered into pursuant to this section shall contain an
agreement between the qualified provider and the energy or water services
company that both parties have performed a reasonable investigation to
determine that the measures contemplated by the contract will result in stated
energy or water savings.  Contract terms may extend the period of the
capital investment repayment schedule prescribed in subsection G of this
section up to the expected life, according to the manufacturer's equipment
standards, of the energy cost savings measures implemented, the term of the
financial agreement or twenty‑five years, whichever is shortest.

D.  Expenditures
from an energy and water savings account shall be used only for the following:

1.  Projects
or measures pursuant to a contract pursuant to this section or section 15‑213.01
that save energy or water in school facilities that are owned by the school
district.  Monies may be used pursuant to this paragraph to provide
technical assistance regarding energy or water savings to school districts by a
qualified provider or energy or water services company.

2.  Payment
of principal, interest, related financing costs and prepayment premiums.

E.  School
districts shall procure energy or water savings measures or services with
monies distributed from the energy and water savings accounts.

F.  Before
the implementation of the energy or water savings measures or services, the
qualified provider or energy or water services company shall compute, and the
school district shall review and approve, the estimated amount of the energy or
water savings and the associated impact on energy or water costs to be achieved
by the school district on an annual and monthly basis over the term of the
guaranteed energy cost savings contract and shall include
these estimates in the contract.  The qualified provider and the
school district shall update the annual and monthly energy or water savings and
associated cost impact estimates annually based on actual experience for the
term of the guaranteed energy cost savings contract.

G.  Before
the implementation of the energy or water savings measures or services, the
qualified provider or financial institution, trustee or paying agent and the
school district shall jointly develop a schedule of monthly or another mutually
agreed on agreed‑on interval
of payments for repayment of the capital investment monies.  The
repayment schedule shall result in lower energy or water costs, which shall
include the total cost of all the installed energy or water savings measures
for the school district over the expected life, according to the manufacturer's
equipment standards, of the energy cost savings measures implemented, the term
of the financial agreement or twenty‑five years, whichever is
shortest.  The repayment schedule shall be included in the contract.

H.  The
school district shall transfer on a monthly basis the
amount of the monthly payment prescribed pursuant to
subsection G of this section to the energy and water savings account from the
maintenance and operation portion of the school district's budget to repay any
unpaid balance of the capital investment previously deposited in the energy and
water savings account from the qualified provider or energy or water services
company plus a reasonable carrying charge.  For the period of time
that the company's capital investment monies and reasonable carrying charge
remain unpaid, the qualified provider or energy or water services company shall
provide a separate billing or billing component to repay the capital investment
on a monthly basis, pursuant to the repayment schedule
prescribed pursuant to subsection G of this section, which shall be paid by the
school district from the energy and water savings account.  The
school district's general budget limit shall be reduced by the amount of monies
transferred to the energy and water savings account pursuant to this section.

I.  After
the balance of the qualified provider's or energy or water services company's
capital investment monies deposited in the energy and water savings account
plus a reasonable carrying charge are repaid in full by the school district,
the school district may discontinue the deposit in the energy and water savings
account of amounts that are prescribed in subsection G of this section.

J.  Any
monies associated with an energy or water savings project remaining in the
energy and water savings account after the capital investment monies of the
qualified provider or energy or water services company plus a reasonable
carrying charge are repaid in full may be transferred to the maintenance and
operation portion of the school district's budget, and the general budget limit
may be increased by the amount transferred.

K.  School
districts may deposit energy‑related rebate or grant monies in the energy
and water savings account to assist in funding energy or water savings
projects.  These rebate or grant monies may be used to reduce the total cost of
energy or water savings projects and to reduce the amount of capital investment
monies received from and repaid to utility, energy or water services
companies.  School districts are not required to repay the rebate or
grant monies in the manner described in subsection G of this section pursuant
to the agreements with the providers of rebate or grant funds.

L.  School
districts shall not use or deposit any excess utilities monies budgeted
pursuant to section 15-910 in the energy and water savings account.

M.  School
districts may deposit monies from other funding sources in the energy and water
savings account to fund energy or water saving projects in school
facilities.  These monies shall be repaid in a manner consistent with
this section and pursuant to the contract between the school district and the
provider of the funding.

N.  This
section does not impose an obligation on any energy utility, water utility,
public service corporation or agricultural improvement district to invest
monies or contract with any school district.

O.  For
all projects carried out under this section, the district shall report to the
school facilities board:

1.  The
name of the project.

2.  The
qualified provider.

3.  The
total cost of the project.

4.  The
expected energy cost savings and relevant escalators.

5.  The
agreed on baseline in the measurement and verification agreement in both
kilowatt hours and dollars.

P.  For
all projects carried out under this section, the district shall report to the
school facilities board, by October 15 each year, the actual energy cost
savings. END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Section 15-995, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE15-995.  Special
district assessment for adjacent ways by school district

A.  The
governing board of a school district may contract for constructing, maintaining
or otherwise improving any public way adjacent to any parcel of land owned by
the school district or leased for school purposes by the school district, or an
intersection of any public way adjoining a quarter block in which the parcel of
land is situated, and for the construction of sidewalks, sewers, utility lines,
roadways and other related improvements in or along such streets and
intersections, and to pay for such improvements by the levy of a special
assessment on the taxable property in the school district.  A school
district shall not use any portion of the monies generated from the special
assessment for any construction, maintenance or other improvements to the
school district's property except improvements necessary to ensure the safe ingress
to and egress from public school property directly adjacent to the public way
for buses and fire equipment.  The assessment shall be made a part of
the itemized statement that is regularly filed with the county school
superintendent and that shows the amount of monies needed for the expenses of
schools within the school district for the ensuing year.  Each adjacent ways
project proposal to be funded through this special assessment must be filed
with the school facilities board and include the project cost
estimate.  If the entire project cost for the adjacent ways project
is greater than fifty thousand dollars, the school facilities
board shall approve or deny the project within sixty days after receipt of the
filing of the project proposal by the school district and the
expenditure shall not be made unless the school facilities board validates both
of the following within sixty days after receipt of the
filing of the proposal:

1.  The
project that is proposed to be funded by the assessment is in compliance with
state laws relating to adjacent ways projects.

2.  The
proposal selected by the school district does not contain additional work that
is not listed in the adjacent ways proposal submitted by the school district.

B.  If
any property that is owned by a school district or leased by a school district
for school purposes from any city or county, the state or the United States is
included within the assessment district to be assessed to pay the costs and
expenses of any public improvements initiated by a city, in order to make the
assessments thereon payable by the city in which the improvement is initiated,
the governing board may contract with the municipality or its improvement
district to reimburse it for the amount of the assessment against the property
and to pay the amount so contracted for by the levy of a special assessment as
provided by subsection A of this section.

C.  The
governing board of the school district shall follow the truth in taxation
notice and hearing requirements prescribed in section 15‑905.01,
subsection B.

D.  The
portion of the primary tax rate to fund adjacent ways as provided in this
section shall not be included in the computation of additional state aid for
education as prescribed in section 15‑972. END_STATUTE

Sec. 4.  Section 15-1107, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE15-1107.  Litigation
recovery fund; disposition of proceeds

A.  Monies
received for and derived from settlement of legal controversies or from
recovery of costs, attorney fees or damages by a school district in litigation
by or against the school district shall be deposited with the county treasurer
who shall credit the deposits to the litigation recovery fund of the school
district.  The litigation recovery fund is a continuing fund that is
not subject to reversion.

B.  If
a school district receives monies as provided in subsection A of this section
for the purpose of replacing or repairing school buildings or other school
property, the governing board, or the superintendent or chief administrative
officer with the approval of the governing board, may only
apply the proceeds only to:

1.  Reimburse
the school facilities board building renewal grant fund established by section
15‑2032 OR the EMERGENCY DEFICIENCIES CORRECTION FUND established by
section 15‑2022 to the extent that monies were received by the school
district from the school facilities board for replacing or repairing school
buildings or other school property that was the subject of the dispute and the
monies recovered by the school district pursuant to subsection A of this
section are designated for the replacement or repair.  The SCHOOL
DISTRICT SHALL PRIORITIZE the REIMBURSEMENT of THE SCHOOL FACILITIES BOARD, IF
APPLICABLE.

1.  2.  Pay
any outstanding bonded indebtedness of the school district that is payable from
the levy of taxes on property within the school district.

2.  3.  Construct,
acquire, improve, repair or furnish school buildings after notice.  If the proceeds are applied to a
project that costs more than two hundred fifty thousand dollars, the governing
board, or the superintendent or chief administrative officer with the approval
of the governing board, may apply the proceeds after notice and a hearing.

3.  4.  Replace
or repair the school property other than school buildings.

C.  Except
as provided in subsection B of this section, the governing board, or the
superintendent or chief administrative officer with the approval of the
governing board, may apply the proceeds of litigation recoveries to procure
legal services or for the costs of litigation. END_STATUTE

Sec. 5.  Section 15-2011, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE15-2011.  Minimum
school facility adequacy requirements; definition

A.  The
school facilities board, as determined and prescribed in this chapter, shall
provide funding to school districts for new construction as the number of
pupils in the district fills the existing school facilities and requires more
pupil space.

B.  School
buildings in a school district are adequate if all of the following
requirements are met:

1.  The
buildings contain sufficient and appropriate space and equipment that comply
with the minimum school facility adequacy guidelines established pursuant to
subsection F of this section.  The state shall not fund facilities for elective
courses that require the school district facilities to exceed minimum school
facility adequacy requirements.  The school facilities board shall
determine whether a school building meets the requirements of this paragraph by
analyzing the total square footage that is available for each pupil in
conjunction with the need for specialized spaces and equipment.

2.  The
buildings are in compliance with federal, state and local building and fire
codes and laws that are applicable to the particular building, except that a
school with an aggregate area of less than five thousand square feet is subject
to permitting and inspection by a local fire marshal and is only subject to
regulation or inspection by the state fire marshal if the county, city or town
in which the school is located does not employ a local fire
marshal.  An existing school building is not required to comply with
current requirements for new buildings unless this compliance is specifically
mandated by law or by the building or fire code of the jurisdiction where the
building is located.

3.  The
building systems, including roofs, plumbing, telephone systems, electrical
systems, heating systems and cooling systems, are in working order and are
capable of being properly maintained.

4.  The
buildings are structurally sound.

C.  The
standards that shall be used by the school facilities board to determine
whether a school building meets the minimum adequate gross square footage
requirements are as follows:

1.  For
a school district that provides instruction to pupils in programs for preschool
children with disabilities, kindergarten programs and grades one through six,
eighty square feet per pupil in programs for preschool children with
disabilities, kindergarten programs and grades one through six.

2.  For
a school district that provides instruction to up to eight hundred pupils in
grades seven and eight, eighty‑four square feet per pupil in grades seven
and eight.

3.  For
a school district that provides instruction to more than eight hundred pupils
in grades seven and eight, eighty square feet per pupil in grades seven and
eight or sixty‑seven thousand two hundred square feet, whichever is more.

4.  For
a school district that provides instruction to up to four hundred pupils in
grades nine through twelve, one hundred twenty‑five square feet per pupil
in grades nine through twelve.

5.  For
a school district that provides instruction to more than four hundred and up to
one thousand pupils in grades nine through twelve, one hundred twenty square
feet per pupil in grades nine through twelve or fifty thousand square feet,
whichever is more.

6.  For
a school district that provides instruction to more than one thousand and up to
one thousand eight hundred pupils in grades nine through twelve, one hundred
twelve square feet per pupil in grades nine through twelve or one hundred
twenty thousand square feet, whichever is more.

7.  For
a school district that provides instruction to more than one thousand eight
hundred pupils in grades nine through twelve, ninety‑four square feet per
pupil in grades nine through twelve or two hundred one thousand six hundred
square feet, whichever is more.

D.  The
school facilities board may modify the square footage requirements prescribed
in subsection C of this section or modify the amount of monies awarded to cure
the square footage deficiency pursuant to this section for particular school
districts based on extraordinary circumstances for any of the following
considerations:

1.  The
number of pupils served by the school district.

2.  Geographic
factors.

3.  Grade
configurations other than those prescribed in subsection C of this section.

E.  In
measuring the square footage per pupil requirements of subsection C of this
section, the school facilities board shall:

1.  Use
the most recent one hundredth day average daily membership through the first one hundred days in session.

2.  For
each school, use the lesser of either:

(a)  Total
gross square footage.

(b)  Student
capacity multiplied by the appropriate square footage per pupil prescribed by
subsection C of this section.

3.  Consider
the total space available in all schools in use in the school district, except
that the school facilities board shall allow an exclusion of the square footage
for certain schools and the pupils within the schools' boundaries if the school
district demonstrates to the board's satisfaction unusual or excessive busing
of pupils or unusual attendance boundary changes between schools.

4.  Compute
the gross square footage of all buildings by measuring from exterior wall to
exterior wall.  Square footage used solely for district
administration, storage of vehicles and other nonacademic purposes shall be
excluded from the net square footage.

5.  Include
all portable and modular buildings.

6.  Include
in the net square footage new construction funded wholly or partially by the
school facilities board based on the square footage funded by the school
facilities board.  If the new construction is to exceed the square
footage funded by the school facilities board, the excess square footage shall
not be included in the net square footage if any of the following applies:

(a)  The
excess square footage was constructed before July 1, 2002 or funded by a class
B bond, impact aid revenue bond or capital outlay override approved by the
voters after August 1, 1998 and before June 30, 2002 or funded from
unrestricted capital outlay expended before June 30, 2002.

(b)  The
excess square footage of new school facilities does not exceed twenty‑five
percent of the minimum square footage requirements pursuant to subsection C of
this section.

(c)  The
excess square footage of expansions to school facilities does not exceed twenty‑five
percent of the minimum square footage requirements pursuant to subsection C of
this section.

7.  Exclude
square footage built under a developer agreement according to section 15‑342,
paragraph 33 until the school facilities board provides funding for the square
footage under section 15‑2041, subsection O.

8.  Include
square footage that a school district has leased to another entity.

F.  The
school facilities board shall adopt rules establishing minimum school facility
adequacy guidelines.  The guidelines shall provide the minimum
quality and quantity of school buildings and facilities and equipment necessary
and appropriate to enable pupils to achieve the academic standards pursuant to
section 15‑203, subsection A, paragraphs 12 and 13 and sections 15‑701
and 15‑701.01.  At a minimum, the school facilities board shall
address all of the following in developing these guidelines:

1.  School
sites.

2.  Classrooms.

3.  Libraries
and media centers, or both.

4.  Cafeterias.

5.  Auditoriums,
multipurpose rooms or other multiuse space.

6.  Technology.

7.  Transportation.

8.  Facilities
for science, arts and physical education.

9.  Other
facilities and equipment that are necessary and appropriate to achieve the
academic standards prescribed pursuant to section 15‑203, subsection A,
paragraphs 12 and 13 and sections 15‑701 and 15‑701.01.

10.  Appropriate
combinations of facilities or uses listed in this section.

G.  The
board shall consider the facilities and equipment of the schools with the
highest academic productivity scores, as prescribed in section 15‑2002,
subsection A, paragraph 9, subdivision (d), and the highest parent quality
ratings in the establishment of the guidelines.

H.  The
school facilities board may consider appropriate combinations of facilities or
uses in making assessments of and curing existing deficiencies pursuant to
section 15‑2002, subsection A, paragraph 1 and in certifying plans for new
school facilities pursuant to section 15‑2002, subsection A, paragraph 5.

I.  For
the purposes of this section, "student capacity" means the capacity
adjusted to include any additions to or deletions of space, including modular
or portable buildings at the school.  The school facilities board
shall determine the student capacity for each school in conjunction with each
school district, recognizing each school's allocation of space as of July 1,
1998, to achieve the academic standards prescribed pursuant to section 15‑203,
subsection A, paragraphs 12 and 13 and sections 15‑701 and 15‑701.01.
END_STATUTE

Sec. 6.  Section 15-2041, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE15-2041.  New
school facilities fund; capital plan; report

A.  A  The new school facilities fund is
established consisting of monies appropriated by the legislature and monies
credited to the fund pursuant to section 37‑221.  The school facilities
board shall administer the fund and distribute monies, as a continuing
appropriation, to school districts for the purpose of constructing new school
facilities and for contracted expenses pursuant to section 15‑2002,
subsection B, paragraphs 2, 3 and 4.  On June 30 of each fiscal year,
any unobligated contract monies in the new school facilities fund shall be
transferred to the capital reserve fund established by section 15‑2003.

B.  The
school facilities board shall prescribe a uniform format for use by the school
district governing board in developing and annually updating a capital plan
that consists of each of the following:

1.  Enrollment
projections for the next five years for elementary schools and eight years for
middle and high schools, including a description of the methods used to make
the projections.

2.  A
description of new schools or additions to existing schools needed to meet the
building adequacy standards prescribed in section 15‑2011.  The
description shall include:

(a)  The
grade levels and the total number of pupils that the school or addition is
intended to serve.

(b)  The
year in which it is necessary for the school or addition to begin operations.

(c)  A
timeline that shows the planning and construction process for the school or
addition.

3.  Long‑term
projections of the need for land for new schools.

4.  Any
other necessary information required by the school facilities board to evaluate
a school district's capital plan.

5.  If
a school district pays tuition for all or a portion of the school district's
high school pupils to another school district, the capital plan shall indicate
the number of pupils for which the district pays tuition to another
district.  If a school district accepts pupils from another school
district pursuant to section 15‑824, subsection A, the school district
shall indicate the projections for this population separately.  This
paragraph does not apply to a small isolated school district as defined in
section 15‑901.

C.  If
the capital plan indicates a need for a new school or an addition to an
existing school within the next four years or a need for land within the next
ten years, the school district shall submit its plan to the school facilities
board by September 1 and shall request monies from the new school facilities
fund for the new construction or land.  The school facilities board
may require a school district to sell land that was previously purchased
entirely with monies provided by the school facilities board if the school facilities
board determines that the property is no longer needed within the ten‑year
period specified in this subsection for a new school or no longer needed within
that ten‑year period for an addition to an existing school.  The school facilities board may distribute monies from the new
school facilities fund for land if the enrollment projections submitted by the
school district or revised by the school facilities board pursuant to
subsection D, paragraph 1 of this section indicate a need for a new school or
an addition to an existing school within the next four years.  Monies
provided for land shall be in addition to any monies provided pursuant to
subsection D of this section.

D.  The
school facilities board shall distribute monies from the new school facilities
fund for additional square footage as follows:

1.  The
school facilities board shall review and evaluate the enrollment
projections.  On or before March 1, following the submission of the
enrollment projections, the school facilities board shall either approve the
projections as submitted or revise the projections.  In approving or
revising the enrollment projections, the school facilities board shall use the
most recent average daily membership data available.  On request from the
school facilities board, the department of education shall make available the
most recent average daily membership data for use in revising the enrollment
projections.  In determining new construction requirements, the
school facilities board shall determine the net new growth of pupils that will
require additional square footage that exceeds the building adequacy standards
prescribed in section 15‑2011.  If the projected growth and the
existing number of pupils exceed three hundred fifty pupils who are served in a
school district other than the pupil's resident school district, the school
facilities board, the receiving school district and the resident school
district shall develop a capital facilities plan on how to best serve those
pupils.  A small isolated school district as defined in section 15‑901
is not required to develop a capital facilities plan pursuant to this
paragraph.

2.  If
the approved projections indicate that additional space would not have been
needed during the current school year in order to meet the building adequacy
standards prescribed in section 15‑2011, the request shall be held for
consideration by the school facilities board for possible future funding and
the school district shall annually submit an updated plan until the additional
space is needed.

3.  If
the approved projections indicate that additional space would have been needed
during the current school year in order to meet the building adequacy standards
prescribed in section 15‑2011, the school facilities board shall provide
an amount as follows:

(a)  Determine
the number of pupils requiring additional square footage to meet building
adequacy standards.  This amount for elementary schools shall not be
less than the number of new pupils for whom space will be needed in the next
year and shall not exceed the number of new pupils for whom space will be
needed in the next five years.  This amount for middle and high
schools shall not be less than the number of new pupils for whom space will be
needed in the next four years and shall not exceed the number of new pupils for
whom space will be needed in the next eight years.

(b)  Multiply
the number of pupils determined in subdivision (a) of this paragraph by the
square footage per pupil.  The square footage per pupil is ninety
square feet per pupil for preschool children with disabilities, kindergarten
programs and grades one through six, one hundred square feet for grades seven
and eight, one hundred thirty‑four square feet for a school district that
provides instruction in grades nine through twelve for fewer than one thousand
eight hundred pupils and one hundred twenty‑five square feet for a school
district that provides instruction in grades nine through twelve for at least
one thousand eight hundred pupils.  The total number of pupils in
grades nine through twelve in the district shall determine the square footage
factor to use for net new pupils.  The school facilities board may
modify the square footage requirements prescribed in this subdivision for
particular schools based on any of the following factors:

(i)  The
number of pupils served or projected to be served by the school district.

(ii)  Geographic
factors.

(iii)  Grade
configurations other than those prescribed in this subdivision.

(iv)  Compliance
with minimum school facility adequacy requirements established pursuant to
section 15‑2011.

(c)  Multiply
the product obtained in subdivision (b) of this paragraph by the cost per
square foot.  The cost per square foot is ninety dollars for preschool children
with disabilities, kindergarten programs and grades one through six, ninety‑five
dollars for grades seven and eight and one hundred ten dollars for grades nine
through twelve.  The cost per square foot shall be adjusted annually for
construction market considerations based on an index identified or developed by
the joint legislative budget committee as necessary but not less than once each
year.  The school facilities board shall multiply the cost per square foot by
1.05 for any school district located in a rural area.  The school
facilities board may only modify the base cost per square foot prescribed in
this subdivision for particular schools based on geographic conditions or site
conditions.  For the purposes of this subdivision, "rural area" means
an area outside a thirty‑five‑mile radius of a boundary of a
municipality with a population of more than fifty thousand persons.

(d)  Once
the school district governing board obtains approval from the school facilities
board for new facility construction monies, additional portable or modular
square footage created for the express purpose of providing temporary space for
pupils until the completion of the new facility and any
additional space funded by the school district shall not be included by
the school facilities board for the purpose of new construction funding
calculations.  On completion of the new facility construction
project, any additional space funded by the school district
shall be included as prescribed by this chapter and, if the portable or
modular facilities continue in use, the portable or modular facilities shall be
included as prescribed by this chapter, unless the school facilities board
approves their continued use for the purpose of providing temporary space for
pupils until the completion of the next new facility that has been approved for
funding from the new school facilities fund.

4.  For
projects approved after December 31, 2001, and notwithstanding paragraph 3 of
this subsection, a unified school district that does not have a high school is
not eligible to receive high school space as prescribed by section 15‑2011
and this section unless the unified district qualifies for geographic factors
prescribed by paragraph 3, subdivision (b), item (ii) of this subsection.

5.  If
a joint technical education district leases a building from a school district,
that building shall be included in the school district's square footage
calculation for the purposes of new construction pursuant to this section.

6.  If
a school district leases a building to another entity, that building shall be included
in the school district's square footage calculation for purposes of new
construction pursuant to this section.

7.  A
school district shall qualify for monies from the new school facilities fund for additional square footage in a fiscal year only if the
school facilities board has approved or revised its enrollment projection under
paragraph 3 of this subsection on or before March 1 of the prior fiscal year.

E.  Monies
for architectural and engineering fees, project management services and
preconstruction services shall be distributed on the completion of the analysis
by the school facilities board of the school district's
request.  After receiving monies pursuant to this subsection, the
school district shall submit a design development plan for the school or
addition to the school facilities board before any monies for construction are
distributed.  If the school district's request meets the building
adequacy standards, the school facilities board may review and comment on the
district's plan with respect to the efficiency and effectiveness of the plan in
meeting state square footage and facility standards before distributing the
remainder of the monies.  If the school facilities board modifies the
cost per square foot as prescribed in subsection D, paragraph 3, subdivision
(c) of this section, the school facilities board may deduct the cost of project
management services and preconstruction services from the required cost per
square foot.  The school facilities board may decline to fund the
project if the square footage is no longer required due to revised enrollment
projections.

F.  The
school facilities board shall distribute the monies needed for land for new
schools so that land may be purchased at a price that is less than or equal to
fair market value and in advance of the construction of the new
school.  If necessary, the school facilities board may distribute
monies for land to be leased for new schools if the duration of the lease
exceeds the life expectancy of the school facility by at least fifty
percent.  A school district shall not use land purchased or partially
purchased with monies provided by the school facilities board for a purpose
other than a site for a school facility without obtaining prior written
approval from the school facilities board.  A school district shall
not lease, sell or take any action that would diminish the value of land
purchased or partially purchased with monies provided by the school facilities
board without obtaining prior written approval from the school facilities
board.  The proceeds derived through the sale of any land purchased
or partially purchased, or the sale of buildings funded or partially funded,
with monies provided by the school facilities board shall be returned to the
state fund from which it was appropriated and to any other participating entity
on a proportional basis.  Except as provided in section 15‑342,
paragraph 33, if a school district acquires real property by donation at an
appropriate school site approved by the school facilities board, the school
facilities board shall distribute an amount equal to twenty percent of the fair
market value of the donated real property that can be used for academic
purposes.  The school district shall place the monies in the
unrestricted capital outlay fund and increase the unrestricted capital budget
limit by the amount of monies placed in the fund.  Monies distributed
under this subsection shall be distributed from the new school facilities
fund.  A school district that receives monies from the new school facilities
fund for a donation of land pursuant to section 15‑342, paragraph 33
shall not receive monies from the school facilities board for the donation of
real property pursuant to this subsection.  A school district shall
not pay a consultant a percentage of the value of any of the following:

1.  Donations
of real property, services or cash from any of the following:

(a)  Entities
that have offered to provide construction services to the school district.

(b)  Entities
that have been contracted to provide construction services to the school
district.

(c)  Entities
that build residential units in that school district.

(d)  Entities
that develop land for residential use in that school district.

2.  Monies
received from the school facilities board on behalf of the school district.

3.  Monies
paid by the school facilities board on behalf of the school district.

G.  In
addition to distributions to school districts based on pupil growth
projections, a school district may submit an application to the school
facilities board for monies from the new school facilities fund if one or more
school buildings have outlived their useful life.  If the school
facilities board determines that the school district needs to build a new
school building for these reasons, the school facilities board shall remove the
square footage computations that represent the building from the computation of
the school district's total square footage for purposes of this
section.  If the square footage recomputation reflects that the school
district no longer meets building adequacy standards, the school district
qualifies for a distribution of monies from the new school construction formula
in an amount determined pursuant to subsection D of this section.  The school
facilities board may only modify the base cost per square foot prescribed in
this subsection under extraordinary circumstances for geographic factors or
site conditions.

H.  School
districts that receive monies from the new school facilities fund shall
establish a district new school facilities fund and shall use the monies in the
district new school facilities fund only for the purposes prescribed in this
section.  By October 15 of each year, each school district shall report to the
school facilities board the projects funded at each school in the previous
fiscal year with monies from the district new school facilities fund and shall
provide an accounting of the monies remaining in the new school facilities fund
at the end of the previous fiscal year.

I.  If
a school district has surplus monies received from the new school facilities
fund, the school district may use the surplus monies only for capital purposes
for the project for up to one year after completion of the
project.  If the school district possesses surplus monies from the
new school construction project that have not been expended within one year of
the completion of the project, the school district shall return the surplus
monies to the school facilities board for deposit in the new school facilities
fund.

J.  The
board's consideration of any application filed after December 31 of the
year in which the property becomes territory in the vicinity of a military
airport or ancillary military facility as defined in section 28‑8461 for
monies to fund the construction of new school facilities proposed to be located
in territory in the vicinity of a military airport or ancillary military
facility shall include, if after notice is transmitted to the military airport
pursuant to section 15‑2002 and before the public hearing the military
airport provides comments and an analysis concerning compatibility of the
proposed school facilities with the high noise or accident potential generated
by military airport or ancillary military facility operations that may have an
adverse effect on public health and safety, consideration and analysis of the
comments and analysis provided by the military airport before making a final
determination.

K.  If
a school district uses its own project manager for new school construction, the
members of the school district governing board and the project manager shall
sign an affidavit stating that the members and the project manager understand
and will follow the minimum adequacy requirements prescribed in section 15‑2011.

L.  The
school facilities board shall establish a separate account in the new school
facilities fund designated as the litigation account to pay attorney fees,
expert witness fees and other costs associated with litigation in which the
school facilities board pursues the recovery of damages for deficiencies
correction that resulted from alleged construction defects or design defects
that the school facilities board believes caused or contributed to a failure of
the school building to conform to the building adequacy requirements prescribed
in section 15‑2011.  Attorney fees paid pursuant to this
subsection shall not exceed the market rate for similar types of
litigation.  On or before December 1 of each year, the school
facilities board shall report to the joint committee on capital review the
costs associated with current and potential litigation that may be paid from
the litigation account.

M.  Until
the state board of education and the auditor general adopt rules pursuant to
section 15‑213, subsection I, the school facilities board may allow
school districts to contract for construction services and materials through
the qualified select bidders list method of project delivery for new school
facilities pursuant to this section.

N.  The
school facilities board shall submit electronically a report on project
management services and preconstruction services to the governor, the president
of the senate and the speaker of the house of representatives by December 31 of
each year.  The report shall compare projects that use project management
and preconstruction services with those that do not.  The report
shall address cost, schedule and other measurable components of a construction
project.  School districts, construction manager at risk firms and
project management firms that participate in a school facilities board funded
project shall provide the information required by the school facilities board
in relation to this report.

O.  If
a school district constructs new square footage according to section 15‑342,
paragraph 33, the school facilities board shall review the design plans and
location of any new school facility submitted by school districts and another
party to determine whether the design plans comply with the adequacy standards
prescribed in section 15‑2011 and the square footage per pupil
requirements pursuant to subsection D, paragraph 3, subdivision (b) of this
section.  When the school district qualifies for a distribution of monies from
the new school facilities fund according to this section, the school facilities
board shall distribute monies to the school district from the new school
facilities fund for the square footage constructed under section 15‑342,
paragraph 33 at the same cost per square foot established by this section that
was in effect at the time of the beginning of the construction of the school
facility.  Before the school facilities board distributes any monies
pursuant to this subsection, the school district shall demonstrate to the
school facilities board that the facilities to be funded pursuant to this section
meet the minimum adequacy standards prescribed in section 15‑2011.  The
agreement entered into pursuant to section 15‑342, paragraph 33 shall set
forth the procedures for the allocation of these funds to the parties that
participated in the agreement.

P.  Accommodation
schools are not eligible for monies from the new school facilities fund.

Q.  If the school
facilities board approves a school district for funding from the new school
facilities fund and the full legislative appropriation is not available to the school
district in the fiscal year following the approval by the school facilities
board, the school district may use any legally available monies to pay for the
land or the new construction project approved by the school facilities board
and may reimburse the fund from which the monies were used in subsequent years
with legislative appropriations when those appropriations are made available by
this state. END_STATUTE

