

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 20-359, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE20-359.  Deviations
from filed workers' compensation rates

A.  Every
insurer shall adhere to the filings made by the rating organization of which it
is a member, except that any member insurer may file with the director:

1.  A
uniform percentage decrease or increase in any rate filing to
be applied to the statewide rate portion of the rating
organization's that rate filing.

2.  A
subclassification rate related rule that deviates from the rules or any schedule rating plan filed by the insurer's rating
organization.  An insurer shall not apply a deviation and a schedule
rating plan within the same insurance company rate filing.

B.  Each
deviation filed shall be on file with the director for a waiting period of at
least thirty days before it becomes effective.  On written
application by the insurer making the filing, the director may authorize a
filing to become effective before the waiting period expires.  A deviation that
is filed pursuant to subsection A, paragraph 1 of this section and that is not
disapproved by the director expires the following December 31 at midnight in
this state unless the director terminates the deviation sooner.  A
deviation that is filed pursuant to subsection A, paragraph 2 of this section
continues until the insurer withdraws the deviation or the director determines
that the deviation no longer meets the standards prescribed in section 20‑356,
paragraph 1.  At any time the director may require an insurer to actuarially
support a deviation.  The insurer that files the deviation shall
simultaneously send a copy of the filing to the rating organization of which it
is a member and to any designated rating organization.

C.  A
rating organization shall notify the director if the organization disapproves
any deviation relating to workers' compensation insurance.  The
director shall notify the industrial commission of the disapproval within ten
days of receipt of the disapproval from the rating organization. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Title 20, chapter 2, article 4, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 20-359.01, to read:

START_STATUTE20-359.01.  Requirements
for workers' compensation tiered rate filings

A.  Subject
to the other provisions of this article, an insurer transacting workers'
compensation insurance may file with the director a rate filing for workers'
compensation insurance that provides for a plan with more than one rate tier
for that insurer or a group of insurers under common management if the filing
complies with the following requirements:

1.  Each
tier is established consistent with underwriting rules that are based on
criteria that would lead to a logical distinguishing of potential risk.

2.  Supporting
actuarial analysis or other information is provided that shows a clear
distinction between the following for each tier:

(a)  Expected
losses and expenses.

(b)  Actual
losses and expenses.

B.  An
insurer filing tiered ratings pursuant to this section shall file with the
director an update of the actuarial analysis or other information required
under subsection A, paragraph 2 of this section at least every three years.

C.  An
insurer using tiered ratings may apply underwriting expertise and judgment in
the tier placement process if the underwriting expertise and judgment:

1.  Is
applied in a consistent manner.

2.  When
applied, is fair, reasonable and fully documented.
END_STATUTE

