

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 17-261, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE17-261.  Game
and fish fund

On or before
the fifth day of each month the department shall deposit, pursuant to sections
35‑146 and 35‑147, the monies received from section 28‑1177, from licenses, from the sale of
goods or services at locations other than at shooting ranges that the
commission owns and operates or from any other source under this title in a
special fund known as the game and fish fund, which is set aside, appropriated
and made available to the commission in carrying out the provisions of this
title
and in administering the off‑highway vehicle user indicia program
pursuant to title 28, chapter 3, article 20, and the monies shall be used for
no other purpose.  Expenditures of the monies shall be under control
of the budget laws of this state and no monies shall be expended from the fund
except:

1.  By
the annual budget and to match federal grants for wildlife restoration as
provided for by the legislature.

2.  For
emergency purposes not to exceed twenty‑five thousand dollars in any one
fiscal year when authorized by the governor and the department of
administration. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 28-1171, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE28-1171.  Definitions

In this
article, unless the context otherwise requires:

1.  "Access
road" means a multiple use corridor that meets all of the following
criteria:

(a)  Is
maintained for travel by two-wheel vehicles.

(b)  Allows
entry to staging areas, recreational facilities, trail heads and parking.

(c)  Is
determined to be an access road by the appropriate land managing authority.

2.  "Closed
course" means a maintained facility that uses department approved dust
abatement and fire abatement measures.

3.  "Highway"
means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained by the federal government, the department, a city, a town or a
county if any part of the way is generally open to the use of the public for
purposes of conventional two-wheel drive vehicular travel.  Highway
does not include routes designated for off-highway vehicle use.

4.  "Mitigation"
means the rectification or reduction of existing damage to natural resources,
including flora, fauna and land or cultural resources, including prehistoric or
historic archaeological sites, if the damage is caused by off‑highway
vehicles.

5.  "Off‑highway
recreation facility" includes off‑highway vehicle use areas and
trails designated for use by off‑highway vehicles.

6.  "Off‑highway
vehicle":

(a)  Means
a motorized vehicle when that is operated primarily off of
highways on
land, water, snow, ice or other natural terrain or on a combination of land,
water, snow, ice or other natural terrain and that is designed, modified or
purpose‑built primarily for recreational nonhighway all‑terrain
travel.

(b)  Includes
a two‑wheel,
three‑wheel or four‑wheel vehicle tracked or wheeled vehicle,
utility vehicle, all‑terrain vehicle, motorcycle, four‑wheel drive vehicle, dune
buggy, sand
rail, amphibious
vehicle, ground effects or air cushion vehicle and any other means of land transportation
deriving motive power from a source other than muscle or wind.

(c)  Does
not include a vehicle that is either:

(i)  Designed
primarily for travel on, over or in the water.

(ii)  Used
in installation, inspection, maintenance, repair or related activities
involving facilities for the provision of utility or railroad service or used
in the exploration or mining of minerals or aggregates as defined in title 27.

7.  "Off‑highway
vehicle special event" means an event that is endorsed, authorized, permitted
or sponsored by a federal, state, county or municipal agency and in which the
event participants operate off‑highway vehicles on specific routes or
areas designated by a local authority pursuant to section 28‑627.

8.  "Off‑highway
vehicle trail" means a multiple use corridor that is both of the
following:

(a)  Open
to recreational travel by an off‑highway vehicle.

(b)  Designated
or managed by or for the managing authority of the property that the trail
traverses for off‑highway vehicle use.

9.  "Off‑highway
vehicle use area" means the entire area of a parcel of land, except for
approved buffer areas, that is managed or designated for off‑highway
vehicle use. END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Section 28-1176, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE28-1176.  Off‑highway
vehicle recreation fund; annual reports; definition

A.  An
off‑highway vehicle recreation fund is established.  The fund
consists of:

1.  Monies
appropriated by the legislature.

2.  Monies
deposited pursuant to sections 28-1177 and 28‑5927.

3.  Federal
grants and private gifts.

B.  Monies
in the off‑highway vehicle recreation fund are appropriated to the
Arizona state parks board solely for the purposes provided in this article. 
Interest earned on monies in the fund shall be credited to the fund.  Monies in
the off‑highway vehicle recreation fund are exempt from the provisions of
section 35‑190 relating to lapsing of appropriations.

C.  The
Arizona game and fish department shall spend thirty-five per cent percent of the monies in the off‑highway
vehicle recreation fund for:

1.  Informational and
educational programs related to safety, the environment and responsible use
with respect to off‑highway vehicle recreation. and

2.  Law enforcement
activities relating to this article. and for

3.  the
administration of the indicia program.

4.  Off‑highway
vehicle law enforcement pursuant to title 17, chapter 4, article 3, including
seven full-time employees to enforce this article and title 17, chapter 4,
article 3.

D.  The
state land department shall spend five per cent percent of the monies in the off-highway
vehicle recreational fund to allow occupants of off‑highway vehicles with
resident
or nonresident off‑highway vehicle user indicia to cross state trust land on existing
roads, trails and designated routes.  The state land department shall
use these monies for costs associated with off-highway vehicle use of lands
within its jurisdiction, to mitigate damage to the land, for necessary
environmental, historical and cultural clearance or compliance activities and
to fund enforcement of off‑highway vehicle laws.

E.  The
Arizona state parks board shall spend sixty per cent percent of the monies in the off‑highway
vehicle recreation fund for the following purposes:

1.  No
more than twelve per
cent
percent to
fund staff support to plan and administer the off‑highway vehicle
recreation fund.

2.  To
establish an off-highway vehicle program based on the priorities established in
the off‑highway vehicle recreational plan.

3.  To
designate, construct, maintain, renovate, repair or connect off‑highway
vehicle routes and trails and to designate, manage and acquire land for access
roads, off‑highway vehicle recreation facilities and off‑highway
vehicle use areas.  After expenditures pursuant to paragraph 1 of this
subsection, the Arizona state parks board shall not spend more than thirty-five
per
cent
percent of the
remaining monies received pursuant to this subsection for construction of new
off-highway vehicle trails.

4.  For
enforcement of off‑highway vehicle laws.

5.  For
off-highway vehicle related informational and environmental education programs,
information, signage, maps and responsible use programs.

6.  For
the mitigation of damages to land, revegetation and the prevention and
restoration of damages to natural and cultural resources, including the closure
of existing access roads, off-highway vehicle use areas and off-highway vehicle
routes and trails.

7.  For
necessary environmental, historical and cultural clearance or compliance
activities.

F.  The
allocation of the monies in subsection E, paragraphs 3 through 7 of this
section and the percentages allocated to each of the purposes prescribed in
subsection E, paragraphs 3 through 7 of this section shall be based on an off‑highway
vehicle recreational plan.

G.  Monies
in the off-highway vehicle recreation fund shall not be used to construct new
off-highway vehicle trails or routes on environmentally or culturally sensitive
land unless the appropriate land management agency determines that certain new
trail construction would benefit or protect cultural or sensitive sites.  For
the purposes of this subsection, "environmentally or culturally sensitive
land" means areas of lands that are either:

1.  Administratively
or legislatively designated by the federal government as any of the following:

(a)  A
national monument.

(b)  An
area of critical environmental concern.

(c)  A
conservation area.

(d)  An
inventoried roadless area.

2.  Determined
by the applicable land management agency to contain significant natural or
cultural resources or values.

H.  The
Arizona state parks board shall examine applications for eligible projects and
determine the amount of funding, if any, for each project.  In determining the
amount of monies for eligible projects, the Arizona state parks board shall
give preference to applications for projects with mitigation efforts and for
projects that encompass a large number of purposes described in subsection E,
paragraphs 3 through 7 of this section.

I.  Beginning
September 1, 2011, and on or before September 1 of each subsequent year, each
agency that receives monies from the off-highway vehicle recreation fund shall
submit an off‑highway vehicle report to the president of the senate, the
speaker of the house of representatives, the chairperson of the senate natural
resources and rural affairs committee, or its successor committee, and the
chairperson of the house of representatives natural resources and public safety
committee, or its successor committee.  The report shall be made
available to the public.  The report shall include information on all of the
following if applicable:

1.  The
amount of monies spent or encumbered in the fund during the preceding fiscal
year for the purposes of off-highway vehicle law enforcement activities.

2.  The
amount of monies spent from the off-highway vehicle recreation fund during the
preceding fiscal year for employee services.

3.  The
number of full-time employees employed in the preceding fiscal year in
connection with off-highway vehicle law enforcement activities.

4.  The
amount of monies spent from the off-highway vehicle recreation fund during the
preceding fiscal year for information and education.

5.  The
number and specific location of verbal warnings, written warnings and citations
given or issued during the preceding fiscal year.

6.  A
specific and detailed accounting for all monies spent in accordance with this
section for construction of new off-highway vehicle trails, mitigation of
damages to lands, revegetation, the prevention and restoration of damages to
natural and cultural resources, signage, maps and necessary environmental,
historical and cultural clearance or compliance activities.

J.  For
the purposes of this section, "off-highway vehicle recreational plan"
means a plan that is maintained by the Arizona state parks board pursuant to
section 41‑511.04. END_STATUTE

Sec. 4.  Section 28-1177, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE28-1177.  Off-highway
vehicle user fee; indicia; registration; state trust land recreational permit;
exception

A.  A
person shall not operate or
allow the operation of an
all‑terrain vehicle or an off-highway vehicle in this state without an either a resident
or nonresident
off-highway vehicle user indicia issued by the department if the all-terrain
vehicle or off-highway vehicle meets both of the following criteria:

1.  Is
designed by the manufacturer primarily for travel over unimproved terrain.

2.  Has
an unladen weight of eighteen hundred pounds or less.

B.  A
person shall apply to the department of transportation for the a resident or
nonresident
off-highway vehicle user indicia by submitting an application prescribed by the
department of transportation and a user fee for the indicia in an amount to be
determined by the director of the department of transportation in cooperation
with the director of the Arizona game and fish department and the Arizona state
parks board.  The resident
or nonresident off‑highway vehicle user indicia is valid for one year from the date of
issuance and may be renewed.  The department shall prescribe by rule the design
and placement of the indicia.  

C.  When
a person pays for an a resident off-highway vehicle user indicia
pursuant to this section, the person may request a motor vehicle registration
if the vehicle meets all equipment requirements to be operated on a highway
pursuant to article 16 of this chapter.  If a person submits a signed affidavit
to the department affirming that the vehicle meets all of the equipment
requirements for highway use and that the vehicle will be operated primarily
off of highways, the department shall register the vehicle for highway use and
the vehicle owner is not required to pay the registration fee prescribed in
section 28‑2003.  This subsection does not apply to vehicles
that as produced by the manufacturer meet the equipment requirements to be
operated on a highway pursuant to article 16 of this chapter.

D.  The
director shall deposit, pursuant to sections 35‑146 and 35‑147,
seventy per
cent
percent of the
user fees collected pursuant to this section in the off-highway vehicle recreation
fund established by section 28-1176 and thirty per cent percent of the user fees collected
pursuant to this section in the Arizona highway user revenue fund.

e.  The
Arizona game and fish department may provide for the purchase of nonresident
off-highway vehicle user indicia and may impose an additional service fee in an
amount to be determined by the Arizona game and fish commission by
rule.  The Arizona game and fish department shall deposit, pursuant
to sections 35‑146 and 35‑147, the service fees collected pursuant
to this subsection in the game and fish fund established by section 17‑261.

E.  F.  An occupant of an off-highway
vehicle with a resident
or nonresident off‑highway vehicle user indicia issued pursuant to this section who
crosses state trust lands must comply with all of the rules and requirements
under a state trust land recreational permit.  All occupants of an
off-highway vehicle with a resident
or nonresident off‑highway vehicle user indicia shall obtain a state trust land recreational
permit from the state land department for all other authorized recreational
activities on state trust land.  

F.  G.  This section does not apply to
off-highway vehicles, all‑terrain vehicles or off-road recreational motor
vehicles that are used off-highway exclusively for agricultural, ranching,
construction, mining,
mining exploration
or building trade purposes.

h.  In
consultation with the department of transportation, the Arizona game and fish
department may adopt rules necessary to implement this section. END_STATUTE

Sec. 5.  Section 28-1178, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE28-1178.  Operation
of off-highway vehicles; exceptions

A person may
operate an all-terrain vehicle or an off-highway vehicle in this state without an a resident or
nonresident
off-highway vehicle user indicia issued pursuant to section 28‑1177 if
any of the following applies:

1.  The
person is participating in an off-highway special event.

2.  The
person is operating an all-terrain vehicle or an off-highway vehicle on private
land.

3.  The
person is loading or unloading an all-terrain vehicle or an off-highway vehicle
from a vehicle.

4.  During
a period of emergency or if the operation is directed by a peace officer or
other public authority.

5.  All
of the following apply:

(a)  The
person is not a resident of this state.

(b)  The
person owns the vehicle.

(c)  The
vehicle displays a current off-highway vehicle user indicia or registration
from the person's state of residency.

(d)  The
vehicle is not in this state for more than thirty consecutive days.

5.  The
vehicle displays a valid dealer license plate that the department issues
pursuant to section 28‑4533.
END_STATUTE

