

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 15-1482, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE15-1482.  Powers

The board
shall have power, for and in on behalf of the institution, to:

1.  Acquire
any project or projects and own, operate and maintain the same.

2.  Accept
grants or loans of monies from a federal agency.

3.  Borrow
monies and issue bonds,
subject to voter approval as prescribed in section 15‑1483, and provide for the payment of
the same and for the rights of the holders thereof.

4.  Perform
all acts and do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers
granted by this article. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 15-1483, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE15-1483.  Issuance
of bonds; publicity pamphlet; election; ballot requirements; canvass of votes

A.  The
board, on the approval of a majority of
the qualified voters in the community college district voting at a regularly
scheduled election on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November, for and on behalf of an
institution is
authorized from time to time to
may issue negotiable bonds for the
purpose of acquiring a project or projects.  The board may call an
election to decide whether the bonds of the community college district shall be
issued and sold for the purposes prescribed in this section.  The bonds shall be authorized by
resolution of the board
after the proposed bond issuance has been approved by the voters.  The bonds may be
issued in one or more series, bear such a date or dates, be in such a denomination or denominations,
mature at such a time or times, not exceeding
forty years from the respective dates thereof, mature in such an amount or amounts, bear interest
at such
a rate or
rates, as determined by the board, payable semiannually, be in such a form either coupon or registered,
carry such registration privileges, be executed in such a manner, be payable in such a medium of payment, at such a place or places, and be subject
to such
a term of
redemption, with or without premium, as such the resolution or other resolutions
may provide.  The bonds may be sold at not less than par at either
public or private sale.  The bonds shall be fully negotiable within
the meaning and for all the purposes of title 47, chapter 3.

B.  At least ninety
days before
the election
seeking voter approval for the issuance
of bonds that
do not require voter approval,
a district shall submit information regarding the planned projects that will be
funded with the bond proceeds to the joint committee on capital review for
review.

C.  Bond
counsel fees, financial advisory fees, printing costs and paying agent and
registrar fees for bonds issued pursuant to an election under this section
shall be paid from either the amount authorized by the qualified voters of the
community college district or current operating monies.  Bond
election expenses shall be paid from current operating monies only.

D.  The
board shall order the election to be held in the manner prescribed in title 35,
chapter 3, article 3.

E.  The
ballots shall contain the words "bond approval, yes" and "bond approval,
no", and the voter shall signify the voter's desired
choice.  The ballot shall also state, "the issuance of these
bonds will result in an annual levy of property taxes sufficient to pay the
debt on the bonds."

F.  Not
later than thirty-five days before a bond election conducted pursuant to this
section, the community college district shall mail a publicity pamphlet to each
household in the district that contains a qualified voter.  The
publicity pamphlet shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:

1.  The
date of the election.

2.  The
voter's polling place and the times it is open.

3.  A
complete list of each planned project that will be funded with the proceeds of
the bonds and a description of the proposed cost of each project.

4.  The
tax rate associated with each planned project and the estimated cost of each
project for the owner of a single family home that is valued at one hundred
thousand dollars.

G.  If
the voters approve the issuance of bonds pursuant to this section, the community
college district may not use the bond proceeds for any purposes other than the
planned projects listed in the publicity pamphlet.  The planned
projects may be changed by a subsequent election as provided by this section.

H.  The
official returns shall be delivered to the county board of supervisors or the
appropriate county elections officer.  Within thirty days after the
election, the county board of supervisors or the county elections officer shall
canvass the results of the election and shall file duplicate copies of the
certificate of the result of the election with the clerk of the board of
supervisors and with the governing board of the community college district.END_STATUTE

