

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Title 15, chapter 1, article 5, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 15-158, to read:

START_STATUTE15-158.  Emergency
administration of inhalers by trained personnel; immunity; definitions

A.  Pursuant
to a standing order issued by the chief medical officer of a county health
department, a physician licensed pursuant to title 32, chapter 13 or 17 or a
nurse practitioner licensed pursuant to title 32, chapter 15, an employee of a
school district or charter school who is trained in the administration of
inhalers may administer or assist in the administration of an inhaler to a
pupil or an adult whom the employee believes in good faith to be exhibiting
symptoms of respiratory distress while at school or at a school‑sponsored
activity.  A school district or charter school may accept monetary donations
for or apply for grants for the purchase of inhalers and spacers or holding
chambers or may accept donations of inhalers and spacers or holding chambers
directly from the product manufacturer.

B.  Chief
medical officers of county health departments, physicians licensed pursuant to
title 32, chapter 13 or 17, nurse practitioners licensed pursuant to title 32,
chapter 15, school districts, charter schools and employees of school districts
and charter schools are immune from civil liability with respect to all
decisions made and actions taken that are based on good faith implementation of
the requirements of this section, except in cases of gross negligence, wilful
misconduct or intentional wrongdoing.

C.  For
the purposes of this section:

1.  "Bronchodilator"
means albuterol or another short‑acting bronchodilator that is approved
by the United states food and drug administration for the treatment of
respiratory distress.

2.  "Inhaler"
means a device that delivers a bronchodilator to alleviate symptoms of
respiratory distress, that is manufactured in the form of a metered‑dose
inhaler or dry‑powder inhaler and that includes a spacer or holding
chamber that attaches to the inhaler to improve the delivery of the bronchodilator.

3.  "Respiratory
distress" includes the perceived or actual presence of coughing, wheezing
or shortness of breath. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 15-189.04, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE15-189.04.  Policies
and procedures for the emergency administration of epinephrine and inhalers


The
governing body of each charter school shall prescribe and enforce policies and
procedures for the emergency administration of auto‑injectable
epinephrine auto‑injectors
by a trained employee of the charter school pursuant to section 15‑157 and may prescribe and enforce
policies and procedures for the emergency administration of inhalers by a trained
employee of the charter school pursuant to section 15‑158. END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Section 15-203, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE15-203.  Powers and duties

A.  The
state board of education shall:

1.  Exercise
general supervision over and regulate the conduct of the public school system
and adopt any rules and policies it deems necessary to accomplish this purpose.

2.  Keep
a record of its proceedings.

3.  Make
rules for its own government.

4.  Determine
the policy and work undertaken by it.

5.  Subject
to title 41, chapter 4, article 4, employ staff.

6.  Prescribe
and supervise the duties of its employees pursuant to title 41, chapter 4,
article 4, if not otherwise prescribed by statute.

7.  Delegate
to the superintendent of public instruction the execution of board policies and
rules.

8.  Recommend
to the legislature changes or additions to the statutes pertaining to schools.

9.  Prepare,
publish and distribute reports concerning the educational welfare of this
state.

10.  Prepare
a budget for expenditures necessary for proper maintenance of the board and
accomplishment of its purposes and present the budget to the legislature.

11.  Aid
in the enforcement of laws relating to schools.

12.  Prescribe
a minimum course of study in the common schools, minimum competency
requirements for the promotion of pupils from the third grade and minimum
course of study and competency requirements for the promotion of pupils from
the eighth grade.  The state board of education shall prepare a fiscal impact
statement of any proposed changes to the minimum course of study or competency
requirements and, on completion, shall send a copy to the director of the joint
legislative budget committee and the executive director of the school
facilities board.  The state board of education shall not adopt any changes in
the minimum course of study or competency requirements in effect on July 1,
1998 that will have a fiscal impact on school capital costs.

13.  Prescribe
minimum course of study and competency requirements for the graduation of
pupils from high school.  The state board of education shall prepare
a fiscal impact statement of any proposed changes to the minimum course of
study or competency requirements and, on completion, shall send a copy to the
director of the joint legislative budget committee and the executive director
of the school facilities board.  The state board of education shall
not adopt any changes in the minimum course of study or competency requirements
in effect on July 1, 1998 that will have a fiscal impact on school capital
costs.

14.  Supervise
and control the certification of persons engaged in instructional work directly
as any classroom, laboratory or other teacher or indirectly as a supervisory
teacher, speech therapist, principal or superintendent in a school district,
including school district preschool programs, or any other educational
institution below the community college, college or university level, and
prescribe rules for certification, including rules for certification of
teachers who have teaching experience and who are trained in other states, that
are not unnecessarily restrictive and are substantially similar to the rules
prescribed for the certification of teachers trained in this state.  The rules:

(a)  Shall
allow a variety of alternative teacher and administrator preparation programs,
with variations in program sequence and design, to apply for program approval. 
The state board shall adopt rules pursuant to this subdivision designed to
allow for a variety of formats and shall not require a prescribed answer or
design from the program provider in order to obtain approval from the state
board.  The state board shall evaluate each program provider based on the
program's ability to prepare teachers and administrators and to recruit
teachers and administrators with a variety of experiences and
talents.  The state board shall permit universities under the jurisdiction
of the Arizona board of regents, community colleges in this state, private
postsecondary institutions licensed by this state, school districts, charter
schools and professional organizations to apply for program approval and shall
create application procedures and certification criteria that are less
restrictive than those for traditional preparation
programs.  Alternative preparation program graduates shall:

(i)  Hold
a bachelor's degree from an accredited postsecondary education institution.

(ii)  Demonstrate
professional knowledge and subject knowledge proficiency pursuant to section 15‑533.

(iii)  Obtain
a fingerprint clearance card pursuant to section 15‑534.

(iv)  Complete
training in structured English immersion as prescribed by the state board.

(v)  Complete
training in research‑based systematic phonics instruction as prescribed
in subdivision (b) of this paragraph.

(vi)  Demonstrate
the required proficiency in the Constitutions of the United States and Arizona
as prescribed in section 15‑532.

(b)  Shall
require applicants for all certificates for common school instruction to
complete a minimum of forty‑five classroom hours or three college level
credit hours, or the equivalent, of training in research‑based systematic
phonics instruction from a public or private provider.

(c)  Shall
not require a teacher to obtain a master's degree or to take any additional
graduate courses as a condition of certification or recertification.

(d)  Shall
allow a general equivalency diploma to be substituted for a high school diploma
in the certification of emergency substitute teachers.

(e)  Shall
allow but shall not require the superintendent of a school district to obtain
certification from the state board of education.

(f)  Shall
provide for the issuance of a specialized teaching certificate to classroom
teachers with expertise in either science, technology, engineering or
mathematics.  Teachers who are certified pursuant to this subdivision
shall complete training in structured English immersion as prescribed by the
state board.  Teachers who are certified pursuant to this subdivision
are exempt from the professional knowledge and subject knowledge proficiency
requirements prescribed in section 15‑533 and from the proficiency
requirements prescribed in section 15‑532 on the Constitutions of the
United States and Arizona.  A teacher who obtains a specialized
teaching certificate pursuant to this subdivision may provide instruction in
the teacher's field of expertise in grades six through twelve at any public
school in this state.  This subdivision does not require a teacher
who has obtained another type of teaching certificate from the state board to
obtain a specialized teaching certificate pursuant to this subdivision in order
to provide instruction in grades six through twelve in a science, technology,
engineering or mathematics course.  A classroom teacher is eligible
for a specialized teaching certificate pursuant to this subdivision if the
teacher meets all of the following requirements:

(i)  Has
taught science, technology, engineering or mathematics courses for the last two
consecutive years and for a total of at least three years at one or more
regionally or nationally accredited public or private postsecondary
institutions.  An applicant shall demonstrate compliance with this
requirement by providing the state board with written proof of employment for
specific durations from one or more qualifying postsecondary institutions.

(ii)  Has
either a baccalaureate degree, a master's degree or a doctorate doctoral degree in an academic subject that is specific to
science, technology, engineering or mathematics or has obtained a passing score
on a statewide educator assessment in science, technology, engineering or
mathematics that is recognized by the state board.

(iii)  Obtains
a valid fingerprint clearance card that is issued pursuant to title 41, chapter
12, article 3.1.

(g)  Notwithstanding
section 15‑533, may exempt persons applying for a secondary education
certificate from the subject knowledge portion of the proficiency examination
if the state board determines that the person has work experience in science,
technology, engineering or mathematics and can demonstrate adequate knowledge
of a particular subject through a postsecondary education degree or twenty‑four
credit hours of relevant coursework.

(h)  Shall
allow for a standard certificate issued to a person pursuant to this section to
be renewed for at least eight years and may not require more than fifteen hours
of continuing education credits each year in order to renew any certificate
issued pursuant to this section.

15.  Adopt
a list of approved tests for determining special education assistance to gifted
pupils as defined in and as provided in chapter 7, article 4.1 of this
title.  The adopted tests shall provide separate scores for
quantitative reasoning, verbal reasoning and nonverbal reasoning and shall be
capable of providing reliable and valid scores at the highest ranges of the
score distribution.

16.  Adopt
rules governing the methods for the administration of all proficiency
examinations.

17.  Adopt
proficiency examinations for its use.  The state board of education shall
determine the passing score for the proficiency examinations.

18.  Include
within its budget the cost of contracting for the purchase, distribution and
scoring of the examinations as provided in paragraphs 16 and 17 of this
subsection.

19.  Supervise
and control the qualifications of professional nonteaching school personnel and
prescribe standards relating to qualifications.  The standards shall not
require the business manager of a school district to obtain certification from
the state board of education.

20.  Impose
such disciplinary action, including the issuance of a letter of censure,
suspension, suspension with conditions or revocation of a certificate, on a
finding of immoral or unprofessional conduct.

21.  Establish
an assessment, data gathering and reporting system for pupil performance as
prescribed in chapter 7, article 3 of this title.

22.  Adopt
a rule to promote braille literacy pursuant to section 15‑214.

23.  Adopt
rules prescribing procedures for the investigation by the department of
education of every written complaint alleging that a certificated person has
engaged in immoral conduct.

24.  For
purposes of federal law, serve as the state board for vocational and
technological education and meet at least four times each year solely to
execute the powers and duties of the state board for vocational and
technological education.

25.  Develop
and maintain a handbook for use in the schools of this state that provides
guidance for the teaching of moral, civic and ethical education.  The
handbook shall promote existing curriculum frameworks and shall encourage
school districts to recognize moral, civic and ethical values within
instructional and programmatic educational development programs for the general
purpose of instilling character and ethical principles in pupils in
kindergarten programs and grades one through twelve.

26.  Require
pupils to recite the following passage from the declaration of independence for
pupils in grades four through six at the commencement of the first class of the
day in the schools, except that a pupil shall not be required to participate if
the pupil or the pupil's parent or guardian objects:

We hold
these truths to be self‑evident, that all men are created equal, that
they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights, that among
these are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.  That to secure
these rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving their just powers
from the consent of the governed. . . .

27.  Adopt
rules that provide for educator certification reciprocity. The rules for
issuance of a comparable reciprocal educator certificate shall include a
requirement that the applicant possess a comparable valid certification from
another state that included passing that state's subject knowledge and
professional exams and be in good standing with that other state.  An applicant
who possesses a valid certification from another state and a fingerprint
clearance card pursuant to section 15‑534 and who is in good standing
with that other state shall be issued a standard teaching certificate without
any other requirements from the state board of education or the department of
education.  A person who is issued a certificate pursuant to this
paragraph is not required to meet any requirement prescribed in section 15‑533.

28.  Adopt
rules that provide for the presentation of an honorary high school diploma to a
person who has never obtained a high school diploma and who meets both of the
following requirements:

(a)  Currently
resides in this state.

(b)  Provides
documented evidence from the department of veterans' services that the person
enlisted in the armed forces of the United States and served in World War I,
World War II, the Korean conflict or the Vietnam conflict.

29.  Cooperate
with the Arizona‑Mexico commission in the governor's office and with
researchers at universities in this state to collect data and conduct projects
in the United States and Mexico on issues that are within the scope of the
duties of the department of education and that relate to quality of life, trade
and economic development in this state in a manner that will help the Arizona‑Mexico
commission to assess and enhance the economic competitiveness of this state and
of the Arizona‑Mexico region.

30.  Adopt
rules to define and provide guidance to schools as to the activities that would
constitute immoral or unprofessional conduct of certificated persons.

31.  Adopt
guidelines to encourage pupils in grades nine, ten, eleven and twelve to
volunteer for twenty hours of community service before graduation from high
school.  A school district that complies with the guidelines adopted
pursuant to this paragraph is not liable for damages resulting from a pupil's
participation in community service unless the school district is found to have
demonstrated wanton or reckless disregard for the safety of the pupil and other
participants in community service.  For the purposes of this paragraph,
"community service" may include service learning.  The guidelines
shall include the following:

(a)  A
list of the general categories in which community service may be performed.

(b)  A
description of the methods by which community service will be monitored.

(c)  A
consideration of risk assessment for community service projects.

(d)  Orientation
and notification procedures of community service opportunities for pupils
entering grade nine, including the development of a notification
form.  The notification form shall be signed by the pupil and the
pupil's parent or guardian, except that a pupil shall not be required to
participate in community service if the parent or guardian notifies the
principal of the pupil's school in writing that the parent or guardian does not
wish the pupil to participate in community service.

(e)  Procedures
for a pupil in grade nine to prepare a written proposal that outlines the type
of community service that the pupil would like to perform and the goals that
the pupil hopes to achieve as a result of community service.  The
pupil's written proposal shall be reviewed by a faculty advisor, a guidance
counselor or any other school employee who is designated as the community
service program coordinator for that school.  The pupil may alter the written
proposal at any time before performing community service.

(f)  Procedures
for a faculty advisor, a guidance counselor or any other school employee who is
designated as the community service program coordinator to evaluate and certify
the completion of community service performed by pupils.

32.  To
facilitate the transfer of military personnel and their dependents to and from
the public schools of this state, pursue, in cooperation with the Arizona board
of regents, reciprocity agreements with other states concerning the transfer
credits for military personnel and their dependents.  A reciprocity
agreement entered into pursuant to this paragraph shall:

(a)  Address
procedures for each of the following:

(i)  The
transfer of student records.

(ii)  Awarding
credit for completed coursework.

(iii)  Permitting
a student to satisfy the graduation requirements prescribed in section 15‑701.01
through the successful performance on comparable exit-level assessment instruments
administered in another state.

(b)  Include
appropriate criteria developed by the state board of education and the Arizona
board of regents.

33.  Adopt
guidelines that school district governing boards shall use in identifying
pupils who are eligible for gifted programs and in providing gifted education
programs and services.  The state board of education shall adopt any
other guidelines and rules that it deems necessary in order to carry out the
purposes of chapter 7, article 4.1 of this title.

34.  For
each of the alternative textbook formats of human-voiced audio, large-print and
braille, designate alternative media producers to adapt existing standard print
textbooks or to provide specialized textbooks, or both, for pupils with
disabilities in this state.  Each alternative media producer shall be capable
of producing alternative textbooks in all relevant subjects in at least one of
the alternative textbook formats.  The board shall post the
designated list of alternative media producers on its website.

35.  Adopt
a list of approved professional development training providers for use by
school districts as provided in section 15‑107, subsection J.  The
professional development training providers shall meet the training curriculum
requirements determined by the state board of education in at least the areas
of school finance, governance, employment, staffing, inventory and human
resources, internal controls and procurement.

36.  Adopt
rules to prohibit a person who violates the notification requirements prescribed
in section 15‑183, subsection C, paragraph 8 or section 15‑550,
subsection C from certification pursuant to this title until the person is no
longer charged or is acquitted of any offenses listed in section 41‑1758.03,
subsection B.  The board shall also adopt rules to prohibit a person
who violates the notification requirements, certification surrender
requirements or fingerprint clearance card surrender requirements prescribed in
section 15‑183, subsection C, paragraph 9 or section 15‑550, subsection
D from certification pursuant to this title for at least ten years after the
date of the violation. 

37.  Adopt
rules for the alternative certification of teachers of nontraditional foreign
languages that allow for the passing of a nationally accredited test to
substitute for the education coursework required for certification.

38.  Adopt
and maintain a model framework for a teacher and principal evaluation
instrument that includes quantitative data on student academic progress that
accounts for between thirty‑three percent and fifty percent of the
evaluation outcomes.  The framework shall include four performance
classifications, designated as highly effective, effective, developing and
ineffective, and guidelines for school districts and charter schools to use in
their evaluation instruments.  The state board of education shall
adopt best practices for professional development and evaluator
training.  The state board of education may periodically make
adjustments to align the model framework for teacher and principal evaluations
with assessment or data changes at the state level.  School districts and
charter schools shall use an instrument that meets the data requirements
established by the state board of education to annually evaluate individual teachers
and principals.  School districts and charter schools shall adopt
definitions for the performance classifications adopted by the state board of
education in a public meeting and apply the performance classifications to
their evaluation instruments in a manner designed to improve principal and
teacher performance.  For charter holders, the principal evaluation
instrument applies to each charter school's instructional leader whose primary
responsibility is to oversee the academic performance of the charter
school.  This paragraph does not apply to an officer, director,
member or partner of the charter holder.  The school district
governing board shall discuss at a public meeting at least annually its
aggregate performance classifications of principals and teachers.

39.  Adopt
rules to define competency‑based educational pathways for college and
career readiness that may be used by schools.  The rules shall include the
following components:

(a)  The
establishment of learning outcomes that will be expected for students in a
particular subject.

(b)  A
process and criteria by which assessments may be identified or established to
determine if students have reached the desired competencies in a particular
subject.

(c)  A
mechanism to allow pupils in grades seven through twelve who have demonstrated
competency in a subject to immediately obtain credit for the mastery of that
subject.  The rules shall include a list of applicable subjects, including the
level of competency required for each subject.

40.  In
consultation with the department of health services, the department of
education, medical professionals, school health professionals, school
administrators and an organization that represents school nurses in this state,
adopt rules that prescribe the following for school districts and charter
schools:

(a)  Annual
training in the administration of auto‑injectable epinephrine, as
directed on the prescription protocol, for designated medical and nonmedical
school personnel.  The annual training prescribed in this subdivision
is optional during any fiscal year in which sufficient monies are not
appropriated by the legislature during that fiscal year to provide for the
purchase of two juvenile doses and two adult doses of epinephrine auto‑injectors
at each public school in this state and if the school does not stock two
juvenile doses and two adult doses of epinephrine auto‑injectors at the
school during that fiscal year.

(b)  Annual
training for all school site personnel on the recognition of anaphylactic shock
symptoms and the procedures to follow when anaphylactic shock occurs, following
the national guidelines of the American academy of pediatrics.  The
annual training prescribed in this subdivision is optional during any fiscal
year in which sufficient monies are not appropriated by the legislature during
that fiscal year to provide for the purchase of two juvenile doses and two
adult doses of epinephrine auto‑injectors at each public school in this
state and if the school does not stock two juvenile doses and two adult doses
of epinephrine auto‑injectors at the school during that fiscal year.

(c)  Procedures
for the administration of epinephrine auto‑injectors in emergency
situations, as directed on the prescription protocol. 

(d)  Procedures
for annually requesting a standing order for epinephrine auto‑injectors
pursuant to section 15‑157 from the chief medical officer of the
department of health services, the chief medical officer of a county health
department, a doctor of medicine licensed pursuant to title 32, chapter 13 or a
doctor of osteopathy licensed pursuant to title 32, chapter 17.

(e)  Procedures
for reporting the use of epinephrine auto‑injectors to the department of
health services.

41.  In
consultation with the department of education, medical professionals, school
health professionals, school administrators and an organization that represents
school nurses in this state, adopt rules that prescribe the following for
school districts and charter schools that elect to administer inhalers:

(a)  Annual training in
the recognition of respiratory distress symptoms and the procedures to follow
when respiratory distress occurs, in accordance with good clinical practice,
and the administration of inhalers, as directed on the prescription protocol,
by designated medical and nonmedical school personnel.

(b)  Requirements for
school districts and charter schools that elect to administer inhalers to
designate at least two employees at each school to be trained in the
recognition of respiratory distress symptoms and the procedures to follow when
respiratory distress occurs, in accordance with good clinical practice, and at
least two employees at each school to be trained in the administration of
inhalers, as directed on the prescription protocol.

(c)  Procedures for the administration
of inhalers in emergency situations, as directed on the prescription protocol. 

(d)  Procedures for
annually requesting a standing order for inhalers and spacers or holding
chambers pursuant to section 15‑158 from the chief medical officer of a
county health department, a physician licensed pursuant to title 32, chapter 13
or 17 or a nurse practitioner licensed pursuant to title 32, chapter 15.

(e)  Procedures for
notifying a parent once an inhaler has been administered.

B.  The
state board of education may:

1.  Contract.

2.  Sue
and be sued.

3.  Distribute
and score the tests prescribed in chapter 7, article 3 of this title.

4.  Provide
for an advisory committee to conduct hearings and screenings to determine
whether grounds exist to impose disciplinary action against a certificated
person, whether grounds exist to reinstate a revoked or surrendered certificate
and whether grounds exist to approve or deny an initial application for
certification or a request for renewal of a certificate.  The board
may delegate its responsibility to conduct hearings and screenings to its
advisory committee.  Hearings shall be conducted pursuant to title
41, chapter 6, article 6.

5.  Proceed
with the disposal of any complaint requesting disciplinary action or with any
disciplinary action against a person holding a certificate as prescribed in
subsection A, paragraph 14 of this section after the suspension or expiration
of the certificate or surrender of the certificate by the holder.

6.  Assess
costs and reasonable attorney fees against a person who files a frivolous
complaint or who files a complaint in bad faith.  Costs assessed pursuant to
this paragraph shall not exceed the expenses incurred by the department of
education in the investigation of the complaint.

C.  Placement
decisions of teaching intern certificate holders issued pursuant to subsection
A, paragraph 14, subdivision (a) of this section and section 15 552 shall be
based on agreements between the teacher preparation provider, the provider's
partner organizations and the local education agency.  The practices
of the department of education and the rules and policies of the state board of
education may not restrict placement of teaching intern certification holders
based on local education agency instructional models and may only consider the
academic quality of the school, the effectiveness of the teaching intern
certification holder's on site mentor and the opportunity for a wide variety of
schools and school models to access teaching intern certification holders. END_STATUTE

Sec. 4.  Section 15-342, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE15-342.  Discretionary
powers

The
governing board may:

1.  Expel
pupils for misconduct.

2.  Exclude
from grades one through eight children under six years of age.

3.  Make
such separation of groups of pupils as it deems advisable.

4.  Maintain
such special schools during vacation as deemed necessary for the benefit of the
pupils of the school district.

5.  Permit
a superintendent or principal or representatives of the superintendent or
principal to travel for a school purpose, as determined by a majority vote of
the board.  The board may permit members and members‑elect of
the board to travel within or without the school district for a school purpose
and receive reimbursement.  Any expenditure for travel and
subsistence pursuant to this paragraph shall be as provided in title 38,
chapter 4, article 2.  The designated post of duty referred to in
section 38‑621 shall be construed, for school district governing board
members, to be the member's actual place of residence, as opposed to the school
district office or the school district boundaries.  Such expenditures
shall be a charge against the budgeted school district funds.  The governing
board of a school district shall prescribe procedures and amounts for
reimbursement of lodging and subsistence expenses.  Reimbursement amounts shall
not exceed the maximum amounts established pursuant to section 38‑624,
subsection C.

6.  Construct
or provide in rural districts housing facilities for teachers and other school
employees that the board determines are necessary for the operation of the
school.

7.  Sell
or lease to the state, a county, a city, another school district or a tribal
government agency any school property required for a public purpose, provided
the sale or lease of the property will not affect the normal operations of a
school within the school district.

8.  Annually
budget and expend funds for membership in an association of school districts
within this state.

9.  Enter
into leases or lease‑purchase agreements for school buildings or grounds,
or both, as lessor or as lessee, for periods of less than ten years subject to
voter approval for construction of school buildings as prescribed in section 15‑341,
subsection A, paragraph 7.

10.  Subject
to chapter 16 of this title, sell school sites or enter into leases or lease‑purchase
agreements for school buildings and grounds, as lessor or as lessee, for a
period of ten years or more, but not to exceed ninety‑nine years, if
authorized by a vote of the school district electors in an election called by
the governing board as provided in section 15‑491, except that authorization
by the school district electors in an election is not required if one of the
following requirements is met:

(a)  The
market value of the school property is less than fifty thousand dollars or the
property is procured through a renewable energy development agreement, an
energy performance contract, which among other items includes a renewable
energy power service agreement, or a simplified energy performance contract
pursuant to section 15‑213.01.

(b)  The
buildings and sites are completely funded with monies distributed by the school
facilities board.

(c)  The
transaction involves the sale of improved or unimproved property pursuant to an
agreement with the school facilities board in which the school district agrees
to sell the improved or unimproved property and transfer the proceeds of the
sale to the school facilities board in exchange for monies from the school
facilities board for the acquisition of a more suitable school site.  For a
sale of property acquired by a school district prior to July 9, 1998, a school
district shall transfer to the school facilities board that portion of the
proceeds that equals the cost of the acquisition of a more suitable school
site.  If there are any remaining proceeds after the transfer of monies to the
school facilities board, a school district shall only use those remaining
proceeds for future land purchases approved by the school facilities board, or
for capital improvements not funded by the school facilities board for any
existing or future facility.

(d)  The
transaction involves the sale of improved or unimproved property pursuant to a
formally adopted plan and the school district uses the proceeds of this sale to
purchase other property that will be used for similar purposes as the property
that was originally sold, provided that the sale proceeds of the improved or
unimproved property are used within two years after the date of the original
sale to purchase the replacement property.  If the sale proceeds of
the improved or unimproved property are not used within two years after the
date of the original sale to purchase replacement property, the sale proceeds
shall be used towards payment of any outstanding bonded
indebtedness.  If any sale proceeds remain after paying for
outstanding bonded indebtedness, or if the district has no outstanding bonded
indebtedness, sale proceeds shall be used to reduce the district's primary tax
levy.  A school district shall not use this subdivision unless all of
the following conditions exist:

(i)  The
school district is the sole owner of the improved or unimproved property that
the school district intends to sell.

(ii)  The
school district did not purchase the improved or unimproved property that the
school district intends to sell with monies that were distributed pursuant to
chapter 16 of this title.

(iii)  The
transaction does not violate section 15‑341, subsection G.

11.  Review
the decision of a teacher to promote a pupil to a grade or retain a pupil in a
grade in a common school or to pass or fail a pupil in a course in high
school.  The pupil has the burden of proof to overturn the decision
of a teacher to promote, retain, pass or fail the pupil.  In order to sustain
the burden of proof, the pupil shall demonstrate to the governing board that
the pupil has mastered the academic standards adopted by the state board of
education pursuant to sections 15‑701 and 15‑701.01.  If the
governing board overturns the decision of a teacher pursuant to this paragraph,
the governing board shall adopt a written finding that the pupil has mastered
the academic standards.  Notwithstanding title 38, chapter 3, article 3.1, the
governing board shall review the decision of a teacher to promote a pupil to a
grade or retain a pupil in a grade in a common school or to pass or fail a
pupil in a course in high school in executive session unless a parent or legal
guardian of the pupil or the pupil, if emancipated, disagrees that the review
should be conducted in executive session and then the review shall be conducted
in an open meeting.  If the review is conducted in executive session, the board
shall notify the teacher of the date, time and place of the review and shall
allow the teacher to be present at the review.  If the teacher is not present
at the review, the board shall consult with the teacher before making its
decision.  Any request, including the written request as provided in
section 15‑341, the written evidence presented at the review and the
written record of the review, including the decision of the governing board to
accept or reject the teacher's decision, shall be retained by the governing
board as part of its permanent records.

12.  Provide
transportation or site transportation loading and unloading areas for any child
or children if deemed for the best interest of the district, whether within or
without the district, county or state.

13.  Enter
into intergovernmental agreements and contracts with school districts or other
governing bodies as provided in section 11‑952. Intergovernmental
agreements and contracts between school districts or between a school district
and other governing bodies as provided in section 11‑952 are exempt from
competitive bidding under the procurement rules adopted by the state board of
education pursuant to section 15‑213.

14.  Include
in the curricula it prescribes for high schools in the school district career
and technical education, vocational education and technology education programs
and career and technical, vocational and technology program improvement
services for the high schools, subject to approval by the state board of
education.  The governing board may contract for the provision of career and
technical, vocational and technology education as provided in section 15‑789.

15.  Suspend
a teacher or administrator from the teacher's or administrator's duties without
pay for a period of time of not to exceed ten school days, if the board
determines that suspension is warranted pursuant to section 15‑341,
subsection A, paragraphs 21 and 22.

16.  Dedicate
school property within an incorporated city or town to such city or town or
within a county to that county for use as a public right‑of‑way if
both of the following apply:

(a)  Pursuant
to an ordinance adopted by such city, town or county, there will be conferred
upon the school district privileges and benefits that may include benefits
related to zoning.

(b)  The
dedication will not affect the normal operation of any school within the
district.

17.  Enter
into option agreements for the purchase of school sites.

18.  Donate
surplus or outdated learning materials, educational equipment and furnishings
to nonprofit community organizations where the governing board determines that
the anticipated cost of selling the learning materials, educational equipment
or furnishings equals or exceeds the estimated market value of the materials.

19.  Prescribe
policies for the assessment of reasonable fees for students to use district‑provided
parking facilities.  The fees are to be applied by the district
solely against costs incurred in operating or securing the parking facilities. 
Any policy adopted by the governing board pursuant to this paragraph shall
include a fee waiver provision in appropriate cases of need or economic
hardship.

20.  Establish
alternative educational programs that are consistent with the laws of this
state to educate pupils, including pupils who have been reassigned pursuant to
section 15‑841, subsection E or F.

21.  Require
a period of silence to be observed at the commencement of the first class of
the day in the schools.  If a governing board chooses to require a
period of silence to be observed, the teacher in charge of the room in which
the first class is held shall announce that a period of silence not to exceed
one minute in duration will be observed for meditation, and during that time no
activities shall take place and silence shall be maintained.

22.  Require
students to wear uniforms.

23.  Exchange
unimproved property or improved property, including school sites, where the
governing board determines that the improved property is unnecessary for the
continued operation of the school district without requesting authorization by
a vote of the school district electors if the governing board determines that
the exchange is necessary to protect the health, safety or welfare of pupils or
when the governing board determines that the exchange is based on sound
business principles for either:

(a)  Unimproved
or improved property of equal or greater value.

(b)  Unimproved
property that the owner contracts to improve if the value of the property ultimately
received by the school district is of equal or greater value.

24.  For
common and high school pupils, assess reasonable fees for optional
extracurricular activities and programs conducted when the common or high
school is not in session, except that no fees shall be charged for pupils'
access to or use of computers or related materials.  For high school pupils,
the governing board may assess reasonable fees for fine arts and vocational
education courses and for optional services, equipment and materials offered to
the pupils beyond those required to successfully complete the basic
requirements of any other course, except that no fees shall be charged for
pupils' access to or use of computers or related materials.  Fees assessed
pursuant to this paragraph shall be adopted at a public meeting after notice
has been given to all parents of pupils enrolled at schools in the district and
shall not exceed the actual costs of the activities, programs, services,
equipment or materials.  The governing board shall authorize
principals to waive the assessment of all or part of a fee assessed pursuant to
this paragraph if it creates an economic hardship for a pupil.  For
the purposes of this paragraph, "extracurricular activity" means any
optional, noncredit, educational or recreational activity that supplements the
education program of the school, whether offered before, during or after
regular school hours.

25.  Notwithstanding
section 15‑341, subsection A, paragraphs 7 and 9, construct school
buildings and purchase or lease school sites, without a vote of the school
district electors, if the buildings and sites are totally funded from one or
more of the following:

(a)  Monies
in the unrestricted capital outlay fund, except that the estimated cost shall
not exceed two hundred fifty thousand dollars for a district that utilizes
section 15‑949.

(b)  Monies
distributed from the school facilities board established by section 15‑2001.

(c)  Monies
specifically donated for the purpose of constructing school buildings.

This
paragraph shall not be construed to eliminate the requirement for an election
to raise revenues for a capital outlay override pursuant to section 15‑481
or a bond election pursuant to section 15‑491.

26.  Conduct
a background investigation that includes a fingerprint check conducted pursuant
to section 41‑1750, subsection G for certificated personnel and personnel
who are not paid employees of the school district, as a condition of
employment.  A school district may release the results of a
background check to another school district for employment purposes. The school
district may charge the costs of fingerprint checks to its fingerprinted
employee, except that the school district may not charge the costs of
fingerprint checks for personnel who are not paid employees of the school
district. 

27.  Unless
otherwise prohibited by law, sell advertising as follows:

(a)  Advertisements
shall be age appropriate and not contain promotion of any substance that is
illegal for minors such as alcohol, tobacco and drugs or gambling. 
Advertisements shall comply with the state sex education policy of abstinence.

(b)  Advertising
approved by the governing board for the exterior of school buses may appear
only on the sides of the bus in the following areas:

(i)  The
signs shall be below the seat level rub rail and not extend above the bottom of
the side windows.

(ii)  The
signs shall be at least three inches from any required lettering, lamp, wheel
well or reflector behind the service door or stop signal arm.

(iii)  The
signs shall not extend from the body of the bus so as to allow a handhold or
present a danger to pedestrians.

(iv)  The
signs shall not interfere with the operation of any door or window.

(v)  The
signs shall not be placed on any emergency doors.

(c)  The
school district shall establish an advertisement fund that is composed of
revenues from the sale of advertising.  The monies in an
advertisement fund are not subject to reversion.  

28.  Assess
reasonable damage deposits to pupils in grades seven through twelve for the use
of textbooks, musical instruments, band uniforms or other equipment required
for academic courses.  The governing board shall adopt policies on
any damage deposits assessed pursuant to this paragraph at a public meeting
called for this purpose after providing notice to all parents of pupils in
grades seven through twelve in the school district.  Principals of individual
schools within the district may waive the damage deposit requirement for any
textbook or other item if the payment of the damage deposit would create an
economic hardship for the pupil.  The school district shall return
the full amount of the damage deposit for any textbook or other item if the
pupil returns the textbook or other item in reasonably good condition within
the time period prescribed by the governing board.  For the purposes
of this paragraph, "in reasonably good condition" means the textbook
or other item is in the same or a similar condition as it was when the pupil
received it, plus ordinary wear and tear. 

29.  Notwithstanding
section 15‑1105, expend surplus monies in the civic center school fund
for maintenance and operations or unrestricted capital outlay, if sufficient
monies are available in the fund after meeting the needs of programs
established pursuant to section 15‑1105. 

30.  Notwithstanding
section 15‑1143, expend surplus monies in the community school program
fund for maintenance and operations or unrestricted capital outlay, if
sufficient monies are available in the fund after meeting the needs of programs
established pursuant to section 15‑1142.

31.  Adopt
guidelines for standardization of the format of the school report cards
required by section 15‑746 for schools within the district.

32.  Adopt
policies that require parental notification when a law enforcement officer
interviews a pupil on school grounds.  Policies adopted pursuant to
this paragraph shall not impede a peace officer from the performance of the
peace officer's duties.  If the school district governing board
adopts a policy that requires parental notification:

(a)  The
policy may provide reasonable exceptions to the parental notification
requirement.

(b)  The
policy shall set forth whether and under what circumstances a parent may be
present when a law enforcement officer interviews the pupil, including
reasonable exceptions to the circumstances under which a parent may be present
when a law enforcement officer interviews the pupil, and shall specify a
reasonable maximum time after a parent is notified that an interview of a pupil
by a law enforcement officer may be delayed to allow the parent to be present.

33.  Enter
into voluntary partnerships with any party to finance with funds other than
school district funds and cooperatively design school facilities that comply
with the adequacy standards prescribed in section 15‑2011 and the square
footage per pupil requirements pursuant to section 15‑2041, subsection D,
paragraph 3, subdivision (b).  The design plans and location of any
such school facility shall be submitted to the school facilities board for
approval pursuant to section 15‑2041, subsection 0.  If the school
facilities board approves the design plans and location of any such school
facility, the party in partnership with the school district may cause to be
constructed and the district may begin operating the school facility before
monies are distributed from the school facilities board pursuant to section 15‑2041.  Monies
distributed from the new school facilities fund to a school district in a
partnership with another party to finance and design the school facility shall
be paid to the school district pursuant to section 15‑2041.  The school
district shall reimburse the party in partnership with the school district from
the monies paid to the school district pursuant to section 15‑2041, in
accordance with the voluntary partnership agreement.  Before the
school facilities board distributes any monies pursuant to this subsection, the
school district shall demonstrate to the school facilities board that the
facilities to be funded pursuant to section 15‑2041, subsection O meet
the minimum adequacy standards prescribed in section 15‑2011.  If
the cost to construct the school facility exceeds the amount that the school
district receives from the new school facilities fund, the partnership
agreement between the school district and the other party shall specify that,
except as otherwise provided by the other party, any such excess costs shall be
the responsibility of the school district.  The school district governing board
shall adopt a resolution in a public meeting that an analysis has been
conducted on the prospective effects of the decision to operate a new school
with existing monies from the school district's maintenance and operations
budget and how this decision may affect other schools in the school
district.  If a school district acquires land by donation at an
appropriate school site approved by the school facilities board and a school
facility is financed and built on the land pursuant to this paragraph, the
school facilities board shall distribute an amount equal to twenty per cent percent of the fair market value of the
land that can be used for academic purposes.  The school district
shall place the monies in the unrestricted capital outlay fund and increase the
unrestricted capital budget limit by the amount of the monies placed in the
fund.  Monies distributed under this paragraph shall be distributed
from the new school facilities fund pursuant to section 15-2041.  If
a school district acquires land by donation at an appropriate school site
approved by the school facilities board and a school facility is financed and
built on the land pursuant to this paragraph, the school district shall not
receive monies from the school facilities board for the donation of real property
pursuant to section 15-2041, subsection F.  It is unlawful for:

(a)  A
county, city or town to require as a condition of any land use approval that a
landowner or landowners that entered into a partnership pursuant to this
paragraph provide any contribution, donation or gift, other than a site
donation, to a school district.  This subdivision only applies to the
property in the voluntary partnership agreement pursuant to this paragraph. 

(b)  A
county, city or town to require as a condition of any land use approval that
the landowner or landowners located within the geographic boundaries of the
school subject to the voluntary partnership pursuant to this paragraph provide
any donation or gift to the school district except as provided in the voluntary
partnership agreement pursuant to this paragraph.

(c)  A
community facilities district established pursuant to title 48, chapter 4,
article 6 to be used for reimbursement of financing the construction of a
school pursuant to this paragraph.

(d)  A
school district to enter into an agreement pursuant to this paragraph with any
party other than a master planned community party.  Any land area consisting of
at least three hundred twenty acres that is the subject of a development
agreement with a county, city or town entered into pursuant to section 9‑500.05
or 11‑1101 shall be deemed to be a master planned
community.  For the purposes of this subdivision, "master
planned community" means a land area consisting of at least three hundred
twenty acres, which may be noncontiguous, that is the subject of a zoning
ordinance approved by the governing body of the county, city or town in which
the land is located that establishes the use of the land area as a planned area
development or district, planned community development or district, planned
unit development or district or other land use category or district that is
recognized in the local ordinance of such county, city or town and that
specifies the use of such land is for a master planned development.

34.  Enter
into an intergovernmental agreement with a presiding judge of the juvenile
court to implement a law
related law-related education program as defined in
section 15‑154.  The presiding judge of the juvenile court may
assign juvenile probation officers to participate in a law related law-related education program in any school
district in the county.  The cost of juvenile probation officers who
participate in the program implemented pursuant to this paragraph shall be
funded by the school district.

35.  Offer
to sell outdated learning materials, educational equipment or furnishings at a
posted price commensurate with the value of the items to pupils who are
currently enrolled in that school district before those materials are offered
for public sale.

36.  If
the school district is a small school district as defined in section 15‑901,
and if permitted by federal law, opt out of federal grant opportunities if the
governing board determines that the federal requirements impose unduly
burdensome reporting requirements.

37.  Prescribe
and enforce policies and procedures for the emergency administration of
inhalers by trained employees of the school district pursuant to section 15‑158. END_STATUTE

Sec. 5.  Title 36, chapter 21.1, article 1,
Arizona Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 36-2229, to read:

START_STATUTE36-2229.  Emergency
administration of inhalers; authorized entities; training; immunity;
definitions

A.  A
physician who is licensed pursuant to title 32, chapter 13 or 17 or a nurse
practitioner who is licensed pursuant to title 32, chapter 15 may prescribe
inhalers and spacers or holding chambers in the name of an authorized entity
for use in accordance with this section, and pharmacists may dispense inhalers
and spacers or holding chambers pursuant to a prescription issued in the name
of an authorized entity.  A prescription issued pursuant to this
section is valid for two years.

B.  An
authorized entity may acquire and stock a supply of inhalers and spacers or
holding chambers pursuant to a prescription issued in accordance with this
section.  The inhalers shall be stored in a location that is readily
accessible in an emergency and in accordance with the inhaler's instructions
for use.  An authorized entity shall designate employees or agents
who have completed the training required by subsection D of this section to be
responsible for the storage, maintenance, control and general oversight of the inhalers
and spacers or holding chambers acquired by the authorized entity.

C.  If
an employee or agent of an authorized entity or another individual who has
completed the training required by subsection D of this section believes in
good faith that an individual is experiencing respiratory distress, the
employee, agent or other individual may provide and administer an inhaler to
that individual or may provide an inhaler to the parent, guardian or caregiver
of that individual, for immediate administration, regardless of whether the
individual who is believed to be experiencing respiratory distress has a
prescription for an inhaler and spacer or holding chamber or has previously
been diagnosed with a condition requiring an inhaler. 

D.  An
employee, agent or other individual described in subsection B or C of this
section shall complete initial training for the use of inhalers and, at least
every two years thereafter, shall complete subsequent training.  The
training shall be conducted by a nationally recognized organization that is
experienced in training laypersons in emergency health
treatment.  Training may be conducted online or in person and, at a
minimum, shall cover:

1.  How
to recognize signs and symptoms of respiratory distress.

2.  Standards
and procedures for the storage and administration of an inhaler. 

3.  Emergency
follow-up procedures after the administration of an inhaler.

E.  The
organization that conducts the training required by subsection D of this
section shall issue a certificate to each person who successfully completes the
training.

F.  The
administration of an inhaler pursuant to this section is not the practice of
medicine or any other profession that otherwise requires licensure.

G.  Physicians
licensed pursuant to title 32, chapter 13 or 17 and nurse practitioners
licensed pursuant to title 32, chapter 15 who prescribe an inhaler and spacer
or holding chamber in the name of an authorized entity, authorized entities and
employees and agents of authorized entities that provide or administer inhalers
and organizations that provide training pursuant to subsection D of this
section are immune from civil liability with respect to all decisions made and
actions or omissions taken that are based on good faith implementation of the
requirements of this section, except in cases of gross negligence, wilful
misconduct or intentional wrongdoing.

H.  The
immunity from civil liability provided in subsection G of this section does not
affect a manufacturer's product liability regarding the design, manufacturing
or instructions for use of an inhaler and spacer or holding chamber.

I.  An
authorized entity may accept monetary donations to purchase inhalers and
spacers or holding chambers and may accept donations of inhalers and spacers or
holding chambers directly from the product manufacturer. 

J.  For
the purposes of this section:

1.  "Authorized
entity" means any entity or organization in connection with or at which
allergens capable of causing respiratory distress symptoms may be present,
including recreation camps, day care facilities, youth sports leagues,
amusement parks, restaurants and sports arenas.

2.  "Bronchodilator"
means albuterol or another short‑acting bronchodilator that is approved
by the United States food and drug administration for the treatment of
respiratory distress.

3.  "Inhaler"
means a device that delivers a bronchodilator to alleviate symptoms of
respiratory distress, that is manufactured in the form of a metered‑dose
inhaler or dry‑powder inhaler and that includes a spacer or holding
chamber that attaches to the inhaler to improve the delivery of the
bronchodilator.

4.  "Respiratory
distress" includes the perceived or actual presence of coughing, wheezing
or shortness of breath. END_STATUTE

