

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 8-202, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE8-202.  Jurisdiction
of juvenile court

A.  The
juvenile court has original jurisdiction over all delinquency proceedings
brought under the authority of this title.

B.  The
juvenile court has exclusive original jurisdiction over all proceedings brought
under the authority of this title except for delinquency proceedings.

C.  The
juvenile court may consolidate any matter, except that the juvenile court shall
not consolidate any of the following:

1.  A
criminal proceeding that is filed in another division of superior court and
that involves a child who is subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court.

2.  A
delinquency proceeding with any other proceeding that does not involve
delinquency, unless the juvenile delinquency adjudication proceeding is not
heard at the same time or in the same hearing as a nondelinquency proceeding.

D.  The
juvenile court has jurisdiction of proceedings to: 

1.  Obtain
judicial consent to the marriage, employment or enlistment in the armed
services of a child, if consent is required by law.

2.  In
an action in which parental rights are terminated pursuant to chapter 4,
article 5 or 11 of this title, change the name of a minor child who is the
subject of the action.  If the minor child who is the subject of the action is
twelve years of age or older, the court shall consider the wishes of the child
with respect to the name change.

E.  The
juvenile court has jurisdiction over both civil traffic violations and offenses
listed in section 8‑323, subsection B that are committed within the
county by persons who are under eighteen years of age unless the presiding
judge of the county declines jurisdiction of these cases.  The
presiding judge of the county may decline jurisdiction of civil traffic
violations committed within the county by juveniles if the presiding judge
finds that the declination would promote the more efficient use of limited
judicial and law enforcement resources located within the county.  If
the presiding judge declines jurisdiction, juvenile civil traffic violations
shall be processed, heard and disposed of in the same manner and with the same
penalties as adult civil traffic violations.

F.  The
orders of the juvenile court under the authority of this chapter or chapter 3
or 4 of this title take precedence over any order of any other court of this
state except the court of appeals and the supreme court to the extent that they
are inconsistent with orders of other courts.

G.  Except
as otherwise provided by law in subsection H of this section, jurisdiction of a child that
is obtained by the juvenile court in a proceeding under this chapter or chapter
3 or 4 of this title shall be retained by it, for the purposes of implementing
the orders made and filed in that proceeding, until the child becomes eighteen
years of age, unless terminated by order of the court before the child's
eighteenth birthday. 

H.  If the state files a
notice when proceedings are commenced pursuant to section 8-301, paragraph 1 or
2, the court shall retain jurisdiction over a juvenile who is at least
seventeen years of age and who has been adjudicated a delinquent juvenile until
the juvenile reaches nineteen years of age, unless terminated by order of the
court before the juvenile's nineteenth birthday.

H.  I.  Persons
who are under eighteen years of age shall be prosecuted in the same manner as
adults if either:

1.  The
juvenile court transfers jurisdiction pursuant to section 8‑327.

2.  The
juvenile is charged as an adult with an offense listed in section 13‑501.
END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 8-305, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE8-305.  Detention
center; jail; separate custody; definitions

A.  The
county board of supervisors or the county jail district, if authorized pursuant
to title 48, chapter 25, shall maintain a detention center that is separate and
apart from a jail or lockup in which adults are confined and where juveniles
who are alleged to be delinquent or children who are incorrigible and within
the provisions of this article shall be detained when necessary before or after
a hearing or as a condition of probation.  A juvenile who is charged
with an offense that is not a dangerous offense and that is listed in section
13‑501 may be detained in a juvenile detention center if the detention is
ordered by the court.  The board may enter agreements with public or
private entities to acquire land for, build, purchase, lease‑purchase,
lease or expand a detention center required by this section.

B.  The
board of supervisors or the county jail district, if authorized pursuant to
title 48, chapter 25, may provide for the detention of juveniles who are
accused or convicted of a criminal offense in a jail or lockup in which adults
are confined.  A juvenile who is confined in a jail or lockup in
which adults are confined shall be kept in a physically separate section from
any adult who is charged with or convicted of a criminal offense, and no sight
or sound contact between the juvenile and any charged or convicted adult is
permitted, except to the extent authorized under federal laws or regulations.

C.  A
juvenile, pending a juvenile hearing, shall not be confined with adults charged
with or convicted of a crime, except that:

1.  A
juvenile who is accused of a criminal offense or who is alleged to be
delinquent may be securely detained in such location for up to six hours until
transportation to a juvenile detention center can be arranged if the juvenile
is kept in a physically separate section from any adult who is charged with or
convicted of a crime and no sight or sound contact between the juvenile and any
charged or convicted adult is permitted, except to the extent authorized under
federal laws or regulations.

2.  A
juvenile who is transferred as provided in section 8‑327 to the criminal
division of the superior court may be securely detained if the juvenile is kept
in a physically separate section from any adult charged with or convicted of a
crime, and no sight or sound contact with any charged or convicted adult is
permitted, except to the extent authorized under federal laws or regulations.

3.  A
juvenile who is arrested for an offense listed in section 13‑501 may be
detained in a juvenile detention center until formally charged as an adult. 
After a juvenile has been formally charged as an adult the juvenile may be
either of the following:

(a)  Detained
in a juvenile detention center if the offense is not a dangerous offense and
the detention is ordered by the court.

(b)  Securely
detained in an adult facility if the juvenile is detained separately from any
adult charged with or convicted of a crime, except to the extent authorized
under federal laws or regulations.

D.  In
determining whether to order that a juvenile who is charged with an offense
that is not a dangerous offense and that is listed in section 13‑501 be
detained in a juvenile detention center or an adult facility pursuant to
subsection A or subsection C, paragraph 3, subdivision (a) of this section, the
court shall consider all of the following:

1.  The
best interests of both the juvenile charged as an adult and the other juveniles
detained in the juvenile detention center.

2.  The
severity of the charges against the juvenile charged as an adult.

3.  The
existing programs and facilities for juveniles at both the juvenile detention
center and the adult facility.

4.  Any
other factor relevant to the determination of where to detain the juvenile.

E.  A
child who is alleged to be delinquent or who is alleged to be incorrigible
shall not be securely detained in a jail or lockup in which adults charged with
or convicted of a crime are detained.  A child may be nonsecurely
detained if necessary to obtain the child's name, age, residence or other
identifying information for up to six hours until arrangements for
transportation to any shelter care facility, home or other appropriate place
can be made.  A child who is nonsecurely detained shall be detained
separately from any adult charged with or convicted of a crime, and no sight or
sound contact with any charged or convicted adult is permitted, except to the
extent authorized under federal laws or regulations.

F.  Any
detained juvenile or child who, by the juvenile's or child's conduct, endangers
or evidences that the juvenile or child may endanger the safety of other
detained children shall not be allowed to intermingle with any other juvenile
or child in the detention center.

G.  Pursuant
to section 8‑322, the county board of supervisors, the county jail
district board of directors or the administrative office of the courts on
behalf of the juvenile court may enter into an agreement with public or private
entities to provide the detention centers required by subsection A of this
section.

H.  For
the purposes of this section: , 


1.  "Dangerous offense" has
the same meaning prescribed in section 13‑105. 

2.  "Juvenile"
includes a person who is under the jurisdiction of the juvenile court pursuant
to section 8‑202, subsection H. END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Section 8-341, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE8-341.  Disposition
and commitment; definitions

A.  After
receiving and considering the evidence on the proper disposition of the case,
the court may enter judgment as follows:

1.  It
may award a delinquent juvenile:

(a)  To
the care of the juvenile's parents, subject to the supervision of a probation
department.

(b)  To
a probation department, subject to any conditions the court may impose,
including a period of incarceration in a juvenile detention center of not more
than one year.

(c)  To
a reputable citizen of good moral character, subject to the supervision of a
probation department.

(d)  To
a private agency or institution, subject to the supervision of a probation
officer.

(e)  To
the department of juvenile corrections.

(f)  To
maternal or paternal relatives, subject to the supervision of a probation
department.

(g)  To
an appropriate official of a foreign country of which the juvenile is a foreign
national who is unaccompanied by a parent or guardian in this state to remain
on unsupervised probation for at least one year on the condition that the
juvenile cooperate with that official.

2.  It
may award an incorrigible child:

(a)  To
the care of the child's parents, subject to the supervision of a probation
department.

(b)  To
the protective supervision of a probation department, subject to any conditions
the court may impose.

(c)  To
a reputable citizen of good moral character, subject to the supervision of a
probation department.

(d)  To
a public or private agency, subject to the supervision of a probation department.

(e)  To
maternal or paternal relatives, subject to the supervision of a probation
department.

B.  If
a juvenile is placed on probation pursuant to this section, the period of
probation may continue until the juvenile's eighteenth birthday or
until the juvenile's nineteenth birthday if jurisdiction is retained pursuant
to section 8-202, subsection H, except that the term of probation
shall not exceed one year if all of the following apply:

1.  The
juvenile is not charged with a subsequent offense.

2.  The
juvenile has not been found in violation of a condition of probation.

3.  The
court has not made a determination that it is in the best interests of the
juvenile or the public to require continued supervision.  The court shall state
by minute entry or written order its reasons for finding that continued
supervision is required.

4.  The
offense for which the juvenile is placed on probation does not involve a
dangerous offense as defined in section 13‑105.

5.  The
offense for which the juvenile is placed on probation does not involve a
violation of title 13, chapter 14 or 35.1.

6.  Restitution
ordered pursuant to section 8‑344 has been made.

7.  The
juvenile's parents have not requested that the court continue the juvenile's
probation for more than one year.

C.  If
a juvenile is adjudicated as a first time felony juvenile offender, the court
shall provide the following written notice to the juvenile:

You have
been adjudicated a first time felony juvenile offender.  You are now on notice
that if you are adjudicated of another offense that would be a felony offense
if committed by an adult and if you commit the other offense when you are
fourteen years of age or older, you will be placed on juvenile intensive
probation, which may include home arrest and electronic monitoring, or you may
be placed on juvenile intensive probation and may be incarcerated for a period
of time in a juvenile detention center, or you may be committed to the
department of juvenile corrections or you may be prosecuted as an adult.  If
you are convicted as an adult of a felony offense and you commit any other
offense, you will be prosecuted as an adult.

D.  If
a juvenile is fourteen years of age or older and is adjudicated as a repeat
felony juvenile offender, the juvenile court shall place the juvenile on
juvenile intensive probation, which may include home arrest and electronic
monitoring, may place the juvenile on juvenile intensive probation, which may
include incarceration for a period of time in a juvenile detention center, or may
commit the juvenile to the department of juvenile corrections pursuant to
subsection A, paragraph 1, subdivision (e) of this section for a significant
period of time.

E.  If
the juvenile is adjudicated as a repeat felony juvenile offender, the court
shall provide the following written notice to the juvenile:

You have
been adjudicated a repeat felony juvenile offender.  You are now on notice that
if you are arrested for another offense that would be a felony offense if
committed by an adult and if you commit the other offense when you are fifteen
years of age or older, you will be tried as an adult in the criminal division
of the superior court.  If you commit the other offense when you are fourteen
years of age or older, you may be tried as an adult in the criminal division of
the superior court.  If you are convicted as an adult, you will be sentenced to
a term of incarceration.  If you are convicted as an adult of a felony offense
and you commit any other offense, you will be prosecuted as an adult.

F.  The
failure or inability of the court to provide the notices required under
subsections C and E of this section does not preclude the use of the prior
adjudications for any purpose otherwise permitted.

G.  Except
as provided in subsection S of this section, after considering the nature of
the offense and the age, physical and mental condition and earning capacity of
the juvenile, the court shall order the juvenile to pay a reasonable monetary
assessment if the court determines that an assessment is in aid of
rehabilitation.  If the director of the department of juvenile corrections
determines that enforcement of an order for monetary assessment as a term and
condition of conditional liberty is not cost‑effective, the director may
require the youth to perform an equivalent amount of community restitution in
lieu of the payment ordered as a condition of conditional liberty.

H.  If
a child is adjudicated incorrigible, the court may impose a monetary assessment
on the child of not more than one hundred fifty dollars.

I.  A
juvenile who is charged with unlawful purchase, possession or consumption of
spirituous liquor is subject to section 8‑323.  The monetary assessment
for a conviction of unlawful purchase, possession or consumption of spirituous
liquor by a juvenile shall not exceed five hundred dollars.  The court of
competent jurisdiction may order a monetary assessment or equivalent community
restitution.

J.  The
court shall require the monetary assessment imposed under subsection G or H of
this section on a juvenile who is not committed to the department of juvenile
corrections to be satisfied in one or both of the following forms:

1.  Monetary
reimbursement by the juvenile in a lump sum or installment payments through the
clerk of the superior court for appropriate distribution.

2.  A
program of work, not in conflict with regular schooling, to repair damage to
the victim's property, to provide community restitution or to provide the
juvenile with a job for wages.  The court order for restitution or
monetary assessment shall specify, according to the dispositional program, the
amount of reimbursement and the portion of wages of either existing or provided
work that is to be credited toward satisfaction of the restitution or
assessment, or the nature of the work to be performed and the number of hours
to be spent working.  The number of hours to be spent working shall
be set by the court based on the severity of the offense but shall not be less
than sixteen hours.

K.  If
a juvenile is committed to the department of juvenile corrections, the court
shall specify the amount of the monetary assessment imposed pursuant to
subsection G or H of this section.

L.  After
considering the length of stay guidelines developed pursuant to section 41‑2816,
subsection C, the court may set forth in the order of commitment the minimum
period during which the juvenile shall remain in secure care while in the
custody of the department of juvenile corrections. When the court awards a
juvenile to the department of juvenile corrections or an institution or agency,
it shall transmit with the order of commitment copies of a diagnostic
psychological evaluation and educational assessment if one has been
administered, copies of the case report, all other psychological and medical
reports, restitution orders, any request for postadjudication notice that has
been submitted by a victim and any other documents or records pertaining to the
case requested by the department of juvenile corrections or an institution or
agency.  The department shall not release a juvenile from secure care before
the juvenile completes the length of stay determined by the court in the
commitment order unless the county attorney in the county from which the
juvenile was committed requests the committing court to reduce the length of
stay.  The department may temporarily escort the juvenile from secure care
pursuant to section 41-2804, may release the juvenile from secure care without
a further court order after the juvenile completes the length of stay
determined by the court or may retain the juvenile in secure care for any
period subsequent to the completion of the length of stay in accordance with
the law.

M.  Written
notice of the release of any juvenile pursuant to subsection L of this section
shall be made to any victim requesting notice, the juvenile court that
committed the juvenile and the county attorney of the county from which the
juvenile was committed.

N.  Notwithstanding
any law to the contrary, if a person is under the supervision of the court as
an adjudicated delinquent juvenile at the time the person reaches eighteen
years of age, treatment services may be provided until the person reaches
twenty‑one years of age if the court, the person and the state agree to
the provision of the treatment and a motion to transfer the person pursuant to
section 8‑327 has not been filed or has been withdrawn.  The court may
terminate the provision of treatment services after the person reaches eighteen
years of age if the court determines that any of the following applies:

1.  The
person is not progressing toward treatment goals.

2.  The
person terminates treatment.

3.  The
person commits a new offense after reaching eighteen years of age.

4.  Continued
treatment is not required or is not in the best interests of the state or the
person.

O.  On
the request of a victim of an act that may have involved significant exposure
as defined in section 13‑1415 or that if committed by an adult would be a
sexual offense, the prosecuting attorney shall petition the adjudicating court
to require that the juvenile be tested for the presence of the human
immunodeficiency virus.  If the victim is a minor the prosecuting attorney
shall file this petition at the request of the victim's parent or guardian.  If
the act committed against a victim is an act that if committed by an adult
would be a sexual offense or the court determines that sufficient evidence
exists to indicate that significant exposure occurred, it shall order the
department of juvenile corrections or the department of health services to test
the juvenile pursuant to section 13‑1415.  Notwithstanding any law to the
contrary, the department of juvenile corrections and the department of health
services shall release the test results only to the victim, the delinquent
juvenile, the delinquent juvenile's parent or guardian and a minor victim's
parent or guardian and shall counsel them regarding the meaning and health
implications of the results.

P.  If
a juvenile has been adjudicated delinquent for an offense that if committed by
an adult would be an offense listed in section 41‑1750, subsection C, the
court shall provide the department of public safety Arizona automated
fingerprint identification system established in section 41‑2411 with the
juvenile's ten‑print fingerprints, personal identification data and other
pertinent information.  If a juvenile has been committed to the department of
juvenile corrections the department shall provide the fingerprints and
information required by this subsection to the Arizona automated fingerprint identification
system.  If the juvenile's fingerprints and information have been
previously submitted to the Arizona automated fingerprint identification system
the information is not required to be resubmitted.

Q.  Access
to fingerprint records submitted pursuant to subsection P of this section shall
be limited to the administration of criminal justice as defined in section 41‑1750. 
Dissemination of fingerprint information shall be limited to the name of the
juvenile, juvenile case number, date of adjudication and court of adjudication.

R.  If
a juvenile is adjudicated delinquent for an offense that if committed by an
adult would be a misdemeanor, the court may prohibit the juvenile from carrying
or possessing a firearm while the juvenile is under the jurisdiction of the
department of juvenile corrections or the juvenile court.

S.  If
a juvenile is adjudicated delinquent for a violation of section 13‑1602,
subsection A, paragraph 5, the court shall order the juvenile to pay a fine of
at least three hundred dollars but not more than one thousand dollars.  Any
restitution ordered shall be paid in accordance with section 13‑809,
subsection A.  The court may order the juvenile to perform community
restitution in lieu of the payment for all or part of the fine if it is in the
best interests of the juvenile.  The amount of community restitution
shall be equivalent to the amount of the fine by crediting any service
performed at a rate of ten dollars per hour.  If the juvenile is convicted of a
second or subsequent violation of section 13‑1602, subsection A,
paragraph 5 and is ordered to perform community restitution, the court may
order the parent or guardian of the juvenile to assist the juvenile in the
performance of the community restitution if both of the following apply:

1.  The
parent or guardian had knowledge that the juvenile intended to engage in or was
engaging in the conduct that gave rise to the violation.

2.  The
parent or guardian knowingly provided the juvenile with the means to engage in
the conduct that gave rise to the violation.

T.  If
a juvenile is adjudicated delinquent for an offense involving the purchase,
possession or consumption of spirituous liquor or a violation of title 13,
chapter 34 and is placed on juvenile probation, the court may order the
juvenile to submit to random drug and alcohol testing at least two times per
week as a condition of probation.

U.  A
juvenile who is adjudicated delinquent for an offense involving the purchase,
possession or consumption of spirituous liquor or a violation of title 13,
chapter 34, who is placed on juvenile probation and who is found to have
consumed any spirituous liquor or to have used any drug listed in section 13‑3401
while on probation is in violation of the juvenile's probation.  If a
juvenile commits a third or subsequent violation of a condition of probation as
prescribed by this subsection, the juvenile shall be brought before the
juvenile court and, if the allegations are proven, the court shall either
revoke probation and hold a disposition hearing pursuant to this section or
select additional conditions of probation as it deems necessary, including
detention, global position system monitoring, additional alcohol or drug
treatment, community restitution, additional drug or alcohol testing or a monetary
assessment.

V.  If
jurisdiction of the juvenile court is extended pursuant to section 8‑202,
subsection H, the court shall order continued probation supervision and
treatment services until a child who has been adjudicated a delinquent juvenile
reaches nineteen years of age or until otherwise terminated by the court.  The
court may terminate continued probation supervision or treatment services
before the child's nineteenth birthday if the court determines that continued
probation supervision or treatment is not required or is not in the best
interests of the juvenile or the state or the juvenile commits a criminal
offense after reaching eighteen years of age.

V.  W.  For
the purposes of this section:

1.  "First
time felony juvenile offender" means a juvenile who is adjudicated
delinquent for an offense that would be a felony offense if committed by an
adult.

2.  "Repeat
felony juvenile offender" means a juvenile to whom both of the following
apply:

(a)  Is
adjudicated delinquent for an offense that would be a felony offense if
committed by an adult.

(b)  Previously
has been adjudicated a first time felony juvenile offender.

3.  "Sexual
offense" means oral sexual contact, sexual contact or sexual intercourse
as defined in section 13‑1401. END_STATUTE

Sec. 4.  Section 8-344, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE8-344.  Restitution
payments

A.  If
a juvenile is adjudicated delinquent, the court, after considering the nature
of the offense and the age, physical and mental condition and earning capacity
of the juvenile, shall order the juvenile to make full or partial restitution
to the victim of the offense for which the juvenile was adjudicated delinquent
or to the estate of the victim if the victim has died.  The juvenile shall make
restitution payments to the clerk of the court for disbursement to the victim
or estate of the victim.

B.  The
court shall notify the victim or estate of the victim of the dispositional
hearing.  The court may consider a verified statement from the victim or estate
of the victim concerning damages for lost wages, reasonable damages for injury
to or loss of property and actual expenses of medical treatment for personal
injury, excluding pain and suffering.

C.  In
ordering restitution pursuant to subsection A of this section, the court may
order one or both of the juvenile's custodial parents to make restitution to
the victim of the offense for which the juvenile was adjudicated delinquent or
to the estate of the victim if the victim has died.  The court shall
determine the amount of restitution ordered pursuant to this subsection, except
that the amount shall not exceed the liability limit established pursuant to
section 12‑661.  The court may order a parent or juvenile who is ordered
to pay restitution to satisfy the order in a lump sum or installment payments
to the clerk of the court for disbursement to the victim or estate of the
victim.  If the court orders the juvenile's parents to make restitution
pursuant to this subsection, the court shall order the juvenile to make either
full or partial restitution, regardless of the juvenile's insufficient earning
capacity.  The court shall not consider the ability of the juvenile's
parents to pay restitution before making a restitution order.

D.  The
juvenile court shall retain jurisdiction of the case after the juvenile attains
eighteen years of age for the purpose of modifying the manner in which court
ordered payments are to be made.  After a juvenile attains eighteen years of
age or if the court retains jurisdiction over the juvenile
pursuant to section 8‑202, subsection H on termination of the juvenile's
probation, the juvenile court shall enter the following:

1.  A
juvenile restitution order in favor of the state for the unpaid balance, if
any, of any costs, fees, surcharges or monetary assessments imposed.

2.  A
juvenile restitution order in favor of each person entitled to restitution for
the unpaid balance of any restitution ordered pursuant to this section.

E.  The
clerk of the court shall send a copy of the juvenile restitution order to each
person who is entitled to restitution.

F.  A
juvenile restitution order may be recorded and enforced as any civil judgment,
except that a juvenile restitution order does not require renewal pursuant to
section 12-1611 or 12‑1612.  A juvenile restitution order does not expire
until paid in full.  Enforcement of a juvenile restitution order by any person
who is entitled to restitution or by the state includes the collection of
interest, which accrues at a rate of ten per cent percent per annum.

G.  A
juvenile restitution order is a criminal penalty for the purposes of a federal
bankruptcy involving the juvenile. END_STATUTE

Sec. 5.  Section 41-1750, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-1750.  Central
state repository; department of public safety; duties; funds; accounts;
definitions

A.  The
department is responsible for the effective operation of the central state
repository in order to collect, store and disseminate complete and accurate
Arizona criminal history records and related criminal justice information.  The
department shall:

1.  Procure
from all criminal justice agencies in this state accurate and complete personal
identification data, fingerprints, charges, process control numbers and
dispositions and such other information as may be pertinent to all persons who
have been charged with, arrested for, convicted of or summoned to court as a
criminal defendant for a felony offense or an offense involving domestic
violence as defined in section 13‑3601 or a violation of title 13,
chapter 14 or title 28, chapter 4.

2.  Collect
information concerning the number and nature of offenses known to have been
committed in this state and of the legal steps taken in connection with these
offenses, such other information that is useful in the study of crime and in
the administration of criminal justice and all other information deemed
necessary to operate the statewide uniform crime reporting program and to
cooperate with the federal government uniform crime reporting program.

3.  Collect
information concerning criminal offenses that manifest evidence of prejudice
based on race, color, religion, national origin, sexual orientation, gender or
disability.

4.  Cooperate
with the central state repositories in other states and with the appropriate
agency of the federal government in the exchange of information pertinent to
violators of the law.

5.  Ensure
the rapid exchange of information concerning the commission of crime and the
detection of violators of the law among the criminal justice agencies of other
states and of the federal government.

6.  Furnish
assistance to peace officers throughout this state in crime scene investigation
for the detection of latent fingerprints and in the comparison of latent
fingerprints.

7.  Conduct
periodic operational audits of the central state repository and of a
representative sample of other agencies that contribute records to or receive
criminal justice information from the central state repository or through the
Arizona criminal justice information system.

8.  Establish
and enforce the necessary physical and system safeguards to ensure that the
criminal justice information maintained and disseminated by the central state
repository or through the Arizona criminal justice information system is
appropriately protected from unauthorized inquiry, modification, destruction or
dissemination as required by this section.

9.  Aid
and encourage coordination and cooperation among criminal justice agencies
through the statewide and interstate exchange of criminal justice information.

10.  Provide training
and proficiency testing on the use of criminal justice information to agencies
receiving information from the central state repository or through the Arizona
criminal justice information system.

11.  Operate
and maintain the Arizona automated fingerprint identification system
established by section 41‑2411.

12.  Provide
criminal history record information to the fingerprinting division for the
purpose of screening applicants for fingerprint clearance cards.

B.  The
director may establish guidelines for the submission and retention of criminal
justice information as deemed useful for the study or prevention of crime and
for the administration of criminal justice.

C.  The
chief officers of criminal justice agencies of this state or its political
subdivisions shall provide to the central state repository fingerprints and
information concerning personal identification data, descriptions, crimes for
which persons are arrested, process control numbers and dispositions and such
other information as may be pertinent to all persons who have been charged
with, arrested for, convicted of or summoned to court as criminal defendants
for felony offenses or offenses involving domestic violence as defined in
section 13‑3601 or violations of title 13, chapter 14 or title 28,
chapter 4 that have occurred in this state.

D.  The
chief officers of law enforcement agencies of this state or its political
subdivisions shall provide to the department such information as necessary to
operate the statewide uniform crime reporting program and to cooperate with the
federal government uniform crime reporting program.

E.  The
chief officers of criminal justice agencies of this state or its political
subdivisions shall comply with the training and proficiency testing guidelines
as required by the department to comply with the federal national crime
information center mandates.

F.  The
chief officers of criminal justice agencies of this state or its political
subdivisions also shall provide to the department information concerning crimes
that manifest evidence of prejudice based on race, color, religion, national
origin, sexual orientation, gender or disability.

G.  The
director shall authorize the exchange of criminal justice information between
the central state repository, or through the Arizona criminal justice
information system, whether directly or through any intermediary, only as
follows:

1.  With
criminal justice agencies of the federal government, Indian tribes, this state
or its political subdivisions and other states, on request by the chief
officers of such agencies or their designated representatives, specifically for
the purposes of the administration of criminal justice and for evaluating the
fitness of current and prospective criminal justice employees.

2.  With
any noncriminal justice agency pursuant to a statute, ordinance or executive
order that specifically authorizes the noncriminal justice agency to receive
criminal history record information for the purpose of evaluating the fitness
of current or prospective licensees, employees, contract employees or
volunteers, on submission of the subject's fingerprints and the prescribed
fee.  Each statute, ordinance, or executive order that authorizes noncriminal
justice agencies to receive criminal history record information for these
purposes shall identify the specific categories of licensees, employees,
contract employees or volunteers, and shall require that fingerprints of the
specified individuals be submitted in conjunction with such requests for
criminal history record information.

3.  With
the board of fingerprinting for the purpose of conducting good cause exceptions
pursuant to section 41‑619.55 and central registry exceptions pursuant to
section 41‑619.57.

4.  With
any individual for any lawful purpose on submission of the subject of record's
fingerprints and the prescribed fee.

5.  With
the governor, if the governor elects to become actively involved in the
investigation of criminal activity or the administration of criminal justice in
accordance with the governor's constitutional duty to ensure that the laws are
faithfully executed or as needed to carry out the other responsibilities of the
governor's office.

6.  With
regional computer centers that maintain authorized computer‑to‑computer
interfaces with the department, that are criminal justice agencies or under the
management control of a criminal justice agency and that are established by a
statute, ordinance or executive order to provide automated data processing
services to criminal justice agencies specifically for the purposes of the
administration of criminal justice or evaluating the fitness of regional
computer center employees who have access to the Arizona criminal justice
information system and the national crime information center system.

7.  With
an individual who asserts a belief that criminal history record information
relating to the individual is maintained by an agency or in an information
system in this state that is subject to this section.  On submission of
fingerprints, the individual may review this information for the purpose of
determining its accuracy and completeness by making application to the agency
operating the system.  Rules adopted under this section shall include
provisions for administrative review and necessary correction of any inaccurate
or incomplete information.  The review and challenge process
authorized by this paragraph is limited to criminal history record information.

8.  With
individuals and agencies pursuant to a specific agreement with a criminal
justice agency to provide services required for the administration of criminal
justice pursuant to that agreement if the agreement specifically authorizes
access to data, limits the use of data to purposes for which given and ensures
the security and confidentiality of the data consistent with this section.

9.  With
individuals and agencies for the express purpose of research, evaluative or
statistical activities pursuant to an agreement with a criminal justice agency
if the agreement specifically authorizes access to data, limits the use of data
to research, evaluative or statistical purposes and ensures the confidentiality
and security of the data consistent with this section.

10.  With
the auditor general for audit purposes.

11.  With
central state repositories of other states for noncriminal justice purposes for
dissemination in accordance with the laws of those states.

12.  On
submission of the fingerprint card, with the department of child safety and a
tribal social services agency to provide criminal history record information on
prospective adoptive parents for the purpose of conducting the preadoption
certification investigation under title 8, chapter 1, article 1 if the
department of economic security is conducting the investigation, or with an
agency or a person appointed by the court, if the agency or person is
conducting the investigation.  Information received under this
paragraph shall only be used for the purposes of the preadoption certification
investigation.

13.  With
the department of child safety, a tribal social services agency and the
superior court for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of custodians or
prospective custodians of juveniles, including parents, relatives and
prospective guardians.  Information received under this paragraph
shall only be used for the purposes of that evaluation.  The
information shall be provided on submission of either:

(a)  The
fingerprint card.

(b)  The
name, date of birth and social security number of the person.

14.  On
submission of a fingerprint card, provide criminal history record information
to the superior court for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of
investigators appointed under section 14‑5303 or 14‑5407, guardians
appointed under section 14‑5206 or 14‑5304 or conservators
appointed under section 14‑5401.

15.  With
the supreme court to provide criminal history record information on prospective
fiduciaries pursuant to section 14‑5651.

16.  With
the department of juvenile corrections to provide criminal history record
information pursuant to section 41‑2814.

17.  On
submission of the fingerprint card, provide criminal history record information
to the Arizona peace officer standards and training board or a board certified
law enforcement academy to evaluate the fitness of prospective cadets.

18.  With
the internet sex offender website database established pursuant to section 13‑3827.

19.  With
licensees of the United States nuclear regulatory commission for the purpose of
determining whether an individual should be granted unescorted access to the
protected area of a commercial nuclear generating station on submission of the
subject of record's fingerprints and the prescribed fee.

20.  With
the department of education for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of a
certificated teacher or administrator or an applicant for a teaching or an
administrative certificate provided that the department of education or its
employees or agents have reasonable suspicion that the certificated person
engaged in conduct that would be a criminal violation of the laws of this state
or was involved in immoral or unprofessional conduct or that the applicant
engaged in conduct that would warrant disciplinary action if the applicant were
certificated at the time of the alleged conduct. The information shall be
provided on the submission of either:

(a)  The
fingerprint card.

(b)  The
name, date of birth and social security number of the person.

21.  With
each school district and charter school in this state.  The state board of
education and the state board for charter schools shall provide the department
of public safety with a current list of e‑mail addresses for each school
district and charter school in this state and shall periodically provide the
department of public safety with updated e‑mail addresses.  If
the department of public safety is notified that a person who is required to
have a fingerprint clearance card to be employed by or to engage in volunteer
activities at a school district or charter school has been arrested for or
convicted of an offense listed in section 41‑1758.03, subsection B or has
been arrested for or convicted of an offense that amounts to unprofessional
conduct under section 15‑550, the department of public safety shall
notify each school district and charter school in this state that the person's
fingerprint clearance card has been suspended or revoked.

22.  With
a tribal social services agency and the department of child safety as provided
by law, which currently is the Adam Walsh child protection and safety act of
2006 (42 United States Code section 16961), for the purposes of investigating
or responding to reports of child abuse, neglect or exploitation.  Information
received pursuant to this paragraph from the national crime information center,
the interstate identification index and the Arizona criminal justice
information system network shall only be used for the purposes of investigating
or responding as prescribed in this paragraph.  The information shall
be provided on submission to the department of public safety of either:

(a)  The
fingerprints of the person being investigated.

(b)  The
name, date of birth and social security number of the person.

23.  With
a nonprofit organization that interacts with children or vulnerable adults for
the lawful purpose of evaluating the fitness of all current and prospective
employees, contractors and volunteers of the organization.  The
criminal history record information shall be provided on submission of the
applicant fingerprint card and the prescribed fee.

24.  With
the superior court for the purpose of determining an individual's eligibility
for substance abuse and treatment courts in a family or juvenile case.

25.  With
the governor to provide criminal history record information on prospective
gubernatorial nominees, appointees and employees as provided by law.

H.  The
director shall adopt rules necessary to execute this section.

I.  The
director, in the manner prescribed by law, shall remove and destroy records
that the director determines are no longer of value in the detection or
prevention of crime.

J.  The
director shall establish a fee in an amount necessary to cover the cost of
federal noncriminal justice fingerprint processing for criminal history record
information checks that are authorized by law for noncriminal justice
employment, licensing or other lawful purposes.  An additional fee may be
charged by the department for state noncriminal justice fingerprint
processing.  Fees submitted to the department for state noncriminal
justice fingerprint processing are not refundable.

K.  The
director shall establish a fee in an amount necessary to cover the cost of
processing copies of department reports, eight by ten inch black and white
photographs or eight by ten inch color photographs of traffic accident scenes.

L.  Except
as provided in subsection O of this section, each agency authorized by this
section may charge a fee, in addition to any other fees prescribed by law, in
an amount necessary to cover the cost of state and federal noncriminal justice
fingerprint processing for criminal history record information checks that are
authorized by law for noncriminal justice employment, licensing or other lawful
purposes.

M.  A
fingerprint account within the records processing fund is established for the
purpose of separately accounting for the collection and payment of fees for
noncriminal justice fingerprint processing by the department.  Monies
collected for this purpose shall be credited to the account, and payments by
the department to the United States for federal noncriminal justice fingerprint
processing shall be charged against the account.  Monies in the account not
required for payment to the United States shall be used by the department in
support of the department's noncriminal justice fingerprint processing duties. 
At the end of each fiscal year, any balance in the account not required for
payment to the United States or to support the department's noncriminal justice
fingerprint processing duties reverts to the state general fund.

N.  A
records processing fund is established for the purpose of separately accounting
for the collection and payment of fees for department reports and photographs
of traffic accident scenes processed by the department.  Monies collected for
this purpose shall be credited to the fund and shall be used by the department
in support of functions related to providing copies of department reports and
photographs.  At the end of each fiscal year, any balance in the fund not
required for support of the functions related to providing copies of department
reports and photographs reverts to the state general fund.

O.  The
department of child safety may pay from appropriated monies the cost of federal
fingerprint processing or federal criminal history record information checks
that are authorized by law for employees and volunteers of the department,
guardians pursuant to section 8‑453, subsection A, paragraph 6, the
licensing of foster parents or the certification of adoptive parents.

P.  The
director shall adopt rules that provide for:

1.  The
collection and disposition of fees pursuant to this section.

2.  The
refusal of service to those agencies that are delinquent in paying these fees.

Q.  The
director shall ensure that the following limitations are observed regarding
dissemination of criminal justice information obtained from the central state
repository or through the Arizona criminal justice information system:

1.  Any
criminal justice agency that obtains criminal justice information from the
central state repository or through the Arizona criminal justice information
system assumes responsibility for the security of the information and shall not
secondarily disseminate this information to any individual or agency not
authorized to receive this information directly from the central state
repository or originating agency.

2.  Dissemination
to an authorized agency or individual may be accomplished by a criminal justice
agency only if the dissemination is for criminal justice purposes in connection
with the prescribed duties of the agency and not in violation of this section.

3.  Criminal
history record information disseminated to noncriminal justice agencies or to
individuals shall be used only for the purposes for which it was
given.  Secondary dissemination is prohibited unless otherwise
authorized by law.

4.  The
existence or nonexistence of criminal history record information shall not be
confirmed to any individual or agency not authorized to receive the information
itself.

5.  Criminal history
record information to be released for noncriminal justice purposes to agencies
of other states shall only be released to the central state repositories of
those states for dissemination in accordance with the laws of those states.

6.  Criminal
history record information shall be released to noncriminal justice agencies of
the federal government pursuant to the terms of the federal security clearance
information act (P.L. 99‑169).

R.  This
section and the rules adopted under this section apply to all agencies and
individuals collecting, storing or disseminating criminal justice information
processed by manual or automated operations if the collection, storage or
dissemination is funded in whole or in part with monies made available by the
law enforcement assistance administration after July 1, 1973, pursuant to title
I of the crime control act of 1973, and to all agencies that interact with or
receive criminal justice information from or through the central state
repository and through the Arizona criminal justice information system.

S.  This
section does not apply to criminal history record information contained in:

1.  Posters,
arrest warrants, announcements or lists for identifying or apprehending
fugitives or wanted persons.

2.  Original
records of entry such as police blotters maintained by criminal justice
agencies, compiled chronologically and required by law or long‑standing
custom to be made public if these records are organized on a chronological
basis.

3.  Transcripts
or records of judicial proceedings if released by a court or legislative or
administrative proceedings.

4.  Announcements
of executive clemency or pardon.

5.  Computer
databases, other than the Arizona criminal justice information system, that are
specifically designed for community notification of an offender's presence in
the community pursuant to section 13‑3825 or for public informational
purposes authorized by section 13‑3827.

T.  Nothing
in this section prevents a criminal justice agency from disclosing to the
public criminal history record information that is reasonably contemporaneous
to the event for which an individual is currently within the criminal justice
system, including information noted on traffic accident reports concerning
citations, blood alcohol tests or arrests made in connection with the traffic
accident being investigated.

U.  In
order to ensure that complete and accurate criminal history record information
is maintained and disseminated by the central state repository:

1.  The
booking agency shall take legible ten‑print fingerprints of all persons
who are arrested for offenses listed in subsection C of this
section.  The booking agency shall obtain a process control number
and provide to the person fingerprinted a document that indicates proof of the
fingerprinting and that informs the person that the document must be presented
to the court.

2.  Except
as provided in paragraph 3 of this subsection, if a person is summoned to court
as a result of an indictment or complaint for an offense listed in subsection C
of this section, the court shall order the person to appear before the county
sheriff and provide legible ten‑print fingerprints.  The county
sheriff shall obtain a process control number and provide a document to the
person fingerprinted that indicates proof of the fingerprinting and that
informs the person that the document must be presented to the court.  For
the purposes of this paragraph, "summoned" includes a written promise
to appear by the defendant on a uniform traffic ticket and complaint.

3.  If
a person is arrested for a misdemeanor offense listed in subsection C of this
section by a city or town law enforcement agency, the person shall appear
before the law enforcement agency that arrested the defendant and provide
legible ten‑print fingerprints.  The law enforcement agency shall obtain
a process control number and provide a document to the person fingerprinted
that indicates proof of the fingerprinting and that informs the person that the
document must be presented to the court.

4.  The
mandatory fingerprint compliance form shall contain the following information:

(a)  Whether
ten-print fingerprints have been obtained from the person.

(b)  Whether
a process control number was obtained.

(c)  The
offense or offenses for which the process control number was obtained.

(d)  Any
report number of the arresting authority.

(e)  Instructions
on reporting for ten-print fingerprinting, including available times and
locations for reporting for ten‑print fingerprinting.

(f)  Instructions
that direct the person to provide the form to the court at the person's next
court appearance.

5.  Within
ten days after a person is fingerprinted, the arresting authority or agency
that took the fingerprints shall forward the fingerprints to the department in
the manner or form required by the department.

6.  On
the issuance of a summons for a defendant who is charged with an offense listed
in subsection C of this section, the summons shall direct the defendant to
provide ten‑print fingerprints to the appropriate law enforcement agency.

7.  At
the initial appearance or on the arraignment of a summoned defendant who is
charged with an offense listed in subsection C of this section, if the person
does not present a completed mandatory fingerprint compliance form to the court
or if the court has not received the process control number, the court shall
order that within twenty calendar days the defendant be ten-print fingerprinted
at a designated time and place by the appropriate law enforcement agency.

8.  If
the defendant fails to present a completed mandatory fingerprint compliance
form or if the court has not received the process control number, the court, on
its own motion, may remand the defendant into custody for ten‑print
fingerprinting.  If otherwise eligible for release, the defendant
shall be released from custody after being ten‑print fingerprinted.

9.  In
every criminal case in which the defendant is incarcerated or fingerprinted as
a result of the charge, an originating law enforcement agency or prosecutor,
within forty days of the disposition, shall advise the central state repository
of all dispositions concerning the termination of criminal proceedings against
an individual arrested for an offense specified in subsection C of this
section.  This information shall be submitted on a form or in a manner required
by the department.

10.  Dispositions
resulting from formal proceedings in a court having jurisdiction in a criminal
action against an individual who is arrested for an offense specified in
subsection C of this section or section 8‑341, subsection V  W, paragraph 3 shall be reported to the central state
repository within forty days of the date of the disposition.  This
information shall be submitted on a form or in a manner specified by rules
approved by the supreme court.

11.  The
state department of corrections or the department of juvenile corrections,
within forty days, shall advise the central state repository that it has
assumed supervision of a person convicted of an offense specified in subsection
C of this section or section 8‑341, subsection V  W, paragraph 3. The state department of corrections or the
department of juvenile corrections shall also report dispositions that occur
thereafter to the central state repository within forty days of the date of the
dispositions.  This information shall be submitted on a form or in a
manner required by the department of public safety.

12.  Each
criminal justice agency shall query the central state repository before
dissemination of any criminal history record information to ensure the
completeness of the information.  Inquiries shall be made before any
dissemination except in those cases in which time is of the essence and the
repository is technically incapable of responding within the necessary time
period.  If time is of the essence, the inquiry shall still be made
and the response shall be provided as soon as possible.

V.  The
director shall adopt rules specifying that any agency that collects, stores or
disseminates criminal justice information that is subject to this section shall
establish effective security measures to protect the information from unauthorized
access, disclosure, modification or dissemination.  The rules shall
include reasonable safeguards to protect the affected information systems from
fire, flood, wind, theft, sabotage or other natural or man‑made hazards
or disasters.

W.  The
department shall make available to agencies that contribute to, or receive
criminal justice information from, the central state repository or through the
Arizona criminal justice information system a continuing training program in
the proper methods for collecting, storing and disseminating information in
compliance with this section.

X.  Nothing
in this section creates a cause of action or a right to bring an action
including an action based on discrimination due to sexual orientation.

Y.  For the purposes of
this section:

1.  "Administration
of criminal justice" means performance of the detection, apprehension,
detention, pretrial release, posttrial release, prosecution, adjudication,
correctional supervision or rehabilitation of criminal offenders.  Administration
of criminal justice includes enforcement of criminal traffic offenses and civil
traffic violations, including parking violations, when performed by a criminal
justice agency.  Administration of criminal justice also includes criminal
identification activities and the collection, storage and dissemination of
criminal history record information.

2.  "Administrative
records" means records that contain adequate and proper documentation of
the organization, functions, policies, decisions, procedures and essential
transactions of the agency and that are designed to furnish information to
protect the rights of this state and of persons directly affected by the
agency's activities.

3.  "Arizona
criminal justice information system" or "system" means the
statewide information system managed by the director for the collection,
processing, preservation, dissemination and exchange of criminal justice
information and includes the electronic equipment, facilities, procedures and
agreements necessary to exchange this information.

4.  "Booking
agency" means the county sheriff or, if a person is booked into a
municipal jail, the municipal law enforcement agency.

5.  "Central
state repository" means the central location within the department for the
collection, storage and dissemination of Arizona criminal history records and
related criminal justice information.

6.  "Criminal
history record information" and "criminal history record" means
information that is collected by criminal justice agencies on individuals and
that consists of identifiable descriptions and notations of arrests,
detentions, indictments and other formal criminal charges, and any disposition
arising from those actions, sentencing, formal correctional supervisory action
and release.  Criminal history record information and criminal
history record do not include identification information to the extent that the
information does not indicate involvement of the individual in the criminal
justice system or information relating to juveniles unless they have been
adjudicated as adults.

7.  "Criminal
justice agency" means either:

(a)  A
court at any governmental level with criminal or equivalent jurisdiction,
including courts of any foreign sovereignty duly recognized by the federal
government.

(b)  A
government agency or subunit of a government agency that is specifically
authorized to perform as its principal function the administration of criminal
justice pursuant to a statute, ordinance or executive order and that allocates
more than fifty percent of its annual budget to the administration of criminal
justice.  This subdivision includes agencies of any foreign sovereignty duly
recognized by the federal government.

8.  "Criminal
justice information" means information that is collected by criminal
justice agencies and that is needed for the performance of their legally
authorized and required functions, such as criminal history record information,
citation information, stolen property information, traffic accident reports,
wanted persons information and system network log searches.  Criminal
justice information does not include the administrative records of a criminal
justice agency.

9.  "Disposition"
means information disclosing that a decision has been made not to bring
criminal charges or that criminal proceedings have been concluded or
information relating to sentencing, correctional supervision, release from
correctional supervision, the outcome of an appellate review of criminal
proceedings or executive clemency.

10.  "Dissemination"
means the written, oral or electronic communication or transfer of criminal
justice information to individuals and agencies other than the criminal justice
agency that maintains the information.  Dissemination includes the
act of confirming the existence or nonexistence of criminal justice information.

11.  "Management
control":

(a)  Means the authority
to set and enforce:

(i)  Priorities
regarding development and operation of criminal justice information systems and
programs.

(ii)  Standards
for the selection, supervision and termination of personnel involved in the
development of criminal justice information systems and programs and in the
collection, maintenance, analysis and dissemination of criminal justice
information.

(iii)  Policies
governing the operation of computers, circuits and telecommunications terminals
used to process criminal justice information to the extent that the equipment
is used to process, store or transmit criminal justice information.

(b)  Includes
the supervision of equipment, systems design, programming and operating
procedures necessary for the development and implementation of automated
criminal justice information systems.

12.  "Process
control number" means the Arizona automated fingerprint identification
system number that attaches to each arrest event at the time of fingerprinting
and that is assigned to the arrest fingerprint card, disposition form and other
pertinent documents.

13.  "Secondary
dissemination" means the dissemination of criminal justice information
from an individual or agency that originally obtained the information from the
central state repository or through the Arizona criminal justice information
system to another individual or agency.

14.  "Sexual
orientation" means consensual homosexuality or heterosexuality.

15.  "Subject
of record" means the person who is the primary subject of a criminal
justice record. END_STATUTE

