

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 13-716, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE13-716.  Juvenile
offenders sentence; maximum sentence; life imprisonment; parole eligibility

A.  Notwithstanding any other law, a
person who is sentenced to life imprisonment with the possibility of release
after serving a minimum number of calendar years for an offense that was
committed before the person attained eighteen years of age is eligible for
parole on completion of service of the minimum sentence, regardless of whether
the offense was committed on or after January 1, 1994.  If granted parole, the person shall remain
on parole for the remainder of the person's life except that the person's parole may be revoked
pursuant to section 31‑415. 

B.  Notwithstanding
any other law, a person who is sentenced to serve a term of imprisonment,
including consecutive sentences, of at least twenty-five calendar years for an
offense that was committed before the person attained eighteen years of age is
eligible for parole on completion of service of twenty-five calendar
years.  If granted parole, the person's parole may be revoked
pursuant to section 31‑415. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 13-751, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE13-751.  Sentence
of death or life imprisonment; aggravating and mitigating circumstances;
definition

A.  If
the state has filed a notice of intent to seek the death penalty and the
defendant is:

1.  Convicted
of first degree murder pursuant to section 13‑1105, subsection A,
paragraph 1 or 3 and was at least eighteen years of age at the time of the
commission of the offense, the defendant shall be sentenced to death or
imprisonment in the custody of the state department of corrections for natural
life as determined and in accordance with the procedures provided in section 13‑752.  A
defendant who is sentenced to natural life is not eligible for commutation,
parole, work furlough, work release or release from confinement on any basis.  

2.  Convicted
of first degree murder pursuant to section 13‑1105 and was under eighteen
years of age at the time of the commission of the offense, the defendant shall
be sentenced to imprisonment in the custody of the state department of
corrections for life or
natural life, as determined and in accordance with the procedures provided in
section 13‑752. 
A defendant who is sentenced to natural
life is
not eligible for commutation, parole, work furlough, work release or release
from confinement on any basis.  If the defendant is sentenced to
life, the defendant
shall not be released on any basis until the completion of the service of
twenty‑five calendar years if the murdered person was fifteen or more
years of age and thirty-five years if the murdered person was under fifteen
years of age or was an unborn child.

3.  Convicted
of first degree murder pursuant to section 13‑1105, subsection A,
paragraph 2, the defendant shall be sentenced to death or imprisonment in the
custody of the state department of corrections for life or natural life as
determined and in accordance with the procedures provided in section 13‑752. 
A defendant who is sentenced to natural life is not eligible for commutation,
parole, work furlough, work release or release from confinement on any
basis.  If the defendant is sentenced to life, the defendant shall
not be released on any basis until the completion of the service of twenty-five
calendar years if the murdered person was fifteen or more years of age and
thirty-five years if the murdered person was under fifteen years of age or was
an unborn child.

B.  At
the aggravation phase of the sentencing proceeding that is held pursuant to
section 13‑752, the admissibility of information relevant to any of the
aggravating circumstances set forth in subsection F of this section shall be
governed by the rules of evidence applicable to criminal trials.  The
burden of establishing the existence of any of the aggravating circumstances
set forth in subsection F of this section is on the prosecution.  The
prosecution must prove the existence of the aggravating circumstances beyond a
reasonable doubt.

C.  At
the penalty phase of the sentencing proceeding that is held pursuant to section
13‑752, the prosecution or the defendant may present any information that
is relevant to any of the mitigating circumstances included in subsection G of
this section, regardless of its admissibility under the rules governing
admission of evidence at criminal trials.  The burden of establishing
the existence of the mitigating circumstances included in subsection G of this
section is on the defendant.  The defendant must prove the existence
of the mitigating circumstances by a preponderance of the evidence.  If the
trier of fact is a jury, the jurors do not have to agree unanimously that a
mitigating circumstance has been proven to exist.  Each juror may
consider any mitigating circumstance found by that juror in determining the
appropriate penalty.

D.  Evidence
that is admitted at the trial and that relates to any aggravating or mitigating
circumstances shall be deemed admitted as evidence at a sentencing proceeding
if the trier of fact considering that evidence is the same trier of fact that
determined the defendant's guilt.  The prosecution and the defendant shall be
permitted to rebut any information received at the aggravation or penalty phase
of the sentencing proceeding and shall be given fair opportunity to present
argument as to whether the information is sufficient to establish the existence
of any of the circumstances included in subsections F and G of this section.

E.  In
determining whether to impose a sentence of death or life imprisonment, the
trier of fact shall take into account the aggravating and mitigating
circumstances that have been proven.  The trier of fact shall impose
a sentence of death if the trier of fact finds one or more of the aggravating
circumstances enumerated in subsection F of this section and then determines
that there are no mitigating circumstances sufficiently substantial to call for
leniency.

F.  The
trier of fact shall consider the following aggravating circumstances in
determining whether to impose a sentence of death:

1.  The
defendant has been convicted of another offense in the United States for which
under Arizona law a sentence of life imprisonment or death was imposable.

2.  The
defendant has been or was previously convicted of a serious offense, whether
preparatory or completed.  Convictions for serious offenses committed
on the same occasion as the homicide, or not committed on the same occasion but
consolidated for trial with the homicide, shall be treated as a serious offense
under this paragraph.

3.  In
the commission of the offense the defendant knowingly created a grave risk of
death to another person or persons in addition to the person murdered during
the commission of the offense.

4.  The
defendant procured the commission of the offense by payment, or promise of
payment, of anything of pecuniary value.

5.  The
defendant committed the offense as consideration for the receipt, or in
expectation of the receipt, of anything of pecuniary value.

6.  The
defendant committed the offense in an especially heinous, cruel or depraved
manner.

7.  The
defendant committed the offense while:

(a)  In
the custody of or on authorized or unauthorized release from the state
department of corrections, a law enforcement agency or a county or city jail.

(b)  On
probation for a felony offense.

8.  The
defendant has been convicted of one or more other homicides, as defined in
section 13‑1101, that were committed during the commission of the
offense.

9.  The
defendant was an adult at the time the offense was committed or was tried as an
adult and the murdered person was under fifteen years of age, was an unborn
child in the womb at any stage of its development or was seventy years of age
or older.

10.  The
murdered person was an on duty peace officer who was killed in the course of
performing the officer's official duties and the defendant knew, or should have
known, that the murdered person was a peace officer.

11.  The
defendant committed the offense with the intent to promote, further or assist
the objectives of a criminal street gang or criminal syndicate or to join a
criminal street gang or criminal syndicate.

12.  The
defendant committed the offense to prevent a person's cooperation with an
official law enforcement investigation, to prevent a person's testimony in a
court proceeding, in retaliation for a person's cooperation with an official
law enforcement investigation or in retaliation for a person's testimony in a
court proceeding.

13.  The
offense was committed in a cold, calculated manner without pretense of moral or
legal justification.

14.  The
defendant used a remote stun gun or an authorized remote stun gun in the
commission of the offense.  For the purposes of this paragraph:

(a)  "Authorized
remote stun gun" means a remote stun gun that has all of the following:

(i)  An
electrical discharge that is less than one hundred thousand volts and less than
nine joules of energy per pulse.

(ii)  A
serial or identification number on all projectiles that are discharged from the
remote stun gun.

(iii)  An
identification and tracking system that, on deployment of remote electrodes,
disperses coded material that is traceable to the purchaser through records
that are kept by the manufacturer on all remote stun guns and all individual
cartridges sold.

(iv)  A
training program that is offered by the manufacturer.

(b)  "Remote
stun gun" means an electronic device that emits an electrical charge and
that is designed and primarily employed to incapacitate a person or animal
either through contact with electrodes on the device itself or remotely through
wired probes that are attached to the device or through a spark, plasma,
ionization or other conductive means emitting from the device.

G.  The
trier of fact shall consider as mitigating circumstances any factors proffered
by the defendant or the state that are relevant in determining whether to
impose a sentence less than death, including any aspect of the defendant's
character, propensities or record and any of the circumstances of the offense,
including but not limited to the following:

1.  The
defendant's capacity to appreciate the wrongfulness of his conduct or to
conform his conduct to the requirements of law was significantly impaired, but
not so impaired as to constitute a defense to prosecution.

2.  The
defendant was under unusual and substantial duress, although not such as to
constitute a defense to prosecution.

3.  The
defendant was legally accountable for the conduct of another under section 13‑303,
but his participation was relatively minor, although not so minor as to
constitute a defense to prosecution.

4.  The
defendant could not reasonably have foreseen that his conduct in the course of
the commission of the offense for which the defendant was convicted would
cause, or would create a grave risk of causing, death to another person.

5.  The
defendant's age.

H.  For
the purposes of determining whether a conviction of any dangerous crime against
children is a serious offense pursuant to this section, an unborn child shall
be treated like a minor who is under twelve years of age.

I.  In
this section, for purposes of punishment an unborn child shall be treated like
a minor who is under twelve years of age.

J.  For
the purposes of this section, "serious offense" means any of the
following offenses if committed in this state or any offense committed outside
this state that if committed in this state would constitute one of the
following offenses:

1.  First
degree murder.

2.  Second
degree murder.

3.  Manslaughter.

4.  Aggravated
assault resulting in serious physical injury or committed by the use,
threatened use or exhibition of a deadly weapon or dangerous instrument.

5.  Sexual
assault.

6.  Any
dangerous crime against children.

7.  Arson
of an occupied structure.

8.  Robbery.

9.  Burglary
in the first degree.

10.  Kidnapping.

11.  Sexual
conduct with a minor under fifteen years of age.

12.  Burglary
in the second degree.

13.  Terrorism.
END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Section 13-752, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE13-752.  Sentences
of death, life imprisonment or natural life; imposition; sentencing
proceedings; definitions

A.  If
the state has filed a notice of intent to seek the death penalty and the
defendant is convicted of first degree murder, the trier of fact at the
sentencing proceeding shall determine whether to impose a sentence of death in
accordance with the procedures provided in this section.  If the
trier of fact determines that a sentence of death is not appropriate, or if the
state has not filed a notice of intent to seek the death penalty, and the
defendant is convicted of first degree murder pursuant to section 13‑1105,
subsection A, paragraph 1 or 3 and was at least eighteen years of age at the
time of the commission of the offense, the court shall impose a sentence of
natural life.  If the defendant was under eighteen years of age at the time of the
commission of the offense or if the defendant is convicted of first degree
murder pursuant to section 13‑1105, subsection A, paragraph 2, the court
shall determine whether to impose a sentence of life or natural life.

B.  Before
trial, the prosecution shall notice one or more of the aggravating
circumstances under section 13‑751, subsection F.

C.  If
the trier of fact finds the defendant guilty of first degree murder, the trier
of fact shall then immediately determine whether one or more alleged
aggravating circumstances have been proven.  This proceeding is the
aggravation phase of the sentencing proceeding.

D.  If
the trier of fact finds that one or more of the alleged aggravating
circumstances have been proven, the trier of fact shall then immediately
determine whether the death penalty should be imposed.  This proceeding is the
penalty phase of the sentencing proceeding.  

E.  At
the aggravation phase, the trier of fact shall make a special finding on
whether each alleged aggravating circumstance has been proven based on the
evidence that was presented at the trial or at the aggravation phase.  If the
trier of fact is a jury, a unanimous verdict is required to find that the
aggravating circumstance has been proven.  If the trier of fact
unanimously finds that an aggravating circumstance has not been proven, the
defendant is entitled to a special finding that the aggravating circumstance
has not been proven.  If the trier of fact unanimously finds no
aggravating circumstances, the court shall then determine whether to impose a
sentence of life or natural life on the defendant pursuant to subsection A of
this section.

F.  The
penalty phase shall be held immediately after the trier of fact finds at the
aggravation phase that one or more of the aggravating circumstances under
section 13‑751, subsection F have been proven.  A finding by
the trier of fact that any of the remaining aggravating circumstances alleged
has not been proven or the inability of the trier of fact to agree on the issue
of whether any of the remaining aggravating circumstances alleged has been
proven shall not prevent the holding of the penalty phase.

G.  At
the penalty phase, the defendant and the state may present any evidence that is
relevant to the determination of whether there is mitigation that is
sufficiently substantial to call for leniency.  In order for the
trier of fact to make this determination, regardless of whether the defendant
presents evidence of mitigation, the state may present any evidence that
demonstrates that the defendant should not be shown leniency including any
evidence regarding the defendant's character, propensities, criminal record or
other acts.

H.  The
trier of fact shall determine unanimously whether death is the appropriate
sentence.  If the trier of fact is a jury and the jury unanimously determines
that the death penalty is not appropriate, the court shall determine whether to
impose a sentence of life or natural life pursuant to subsection A of this
section.

I.  If
the trier of fact at any prior phase of the trial is the same trier of fact at
the subsequent phase, any evidence that was presented at any prior phase of the
trial shall be deemed admitted as evidence at any subsequent phase of the
trial.

J.  At
the aggravation phase, if the trier of fact is a jury, the jury is unable to
reach a verdict on any of the alleged aggravating circumstances and the jury
has not found that at least one of the alleged aggravating circumstances has
been proven, the court shall dismiss the jury and shall impanel a new
jury.  The new jury shall not retry the issue of the defendant's
guilt or the issue regarding any of the aggravating circumstances that the
first jury found not proved by unanimous verdict.  If the new jury is unable to
reach a unanimous verdict, the court shall impose a sentence of life or natural
life on the defendant.

K.  At
the penalty phase, if the trier of fact is a jury and the jury is unable to
reach a verdict, the court shall dismiss the jury and shall impanel a new
jury.  The new jury shall not retry the issue of the defendant's
guilt or the issue regarding any of the aggravating circumstances that the
first jury found by unanimous verdict to be proved or not proved.  If the new
jury is unable to reach a unanimous verdict, the court shall impose a sentence
of life or natural life on the defendant.

L.  If
the jury that rendered a verdict of guilty is not the jury first impaneled for
the aggravation phase, the jury impaneled in the aggravation phase shall not
retry the issue of the defendant's guilt.  If the jury impaneled in the
aggravation phase is unable to reach a verdict on any of the alleged
aggravating circumstances and the jury has not found that at least one of the
alleged aggravating circumstances has been proven, the court shall dismiss the
jury and shall impanel a new jury.  The new jury shall not retry the issue of
the defendant's guilt or the issue regarding any of the aggravating
circumstances that the first jury found not proved by unanimous verdict.  If
the new jury is unable to reach a unanimous verdict, the court shall impose a
sentence of life or natural life on the defendant.

M.  Alternate
jurors who are impaneled for the trial in a case in which the offense is
punishable by death shall not be excused from the case until the completion of
the sentencing proceeding.

N.  If
the sentence of a person who was sentenced to death is overturned, the person
shall be resentenced pursuant to this section by a jury that is specifically
impaneled for this purpose as if the original sentencing had not occurred.

O.  In
any case that requires sentencing or resentencing in which the defendant has
been convicted of an offense that is punishable by death and in which the trier
of fact was a judge or a jury that has since been discharged, the defendant
shall be sentenced or resentenced pursuant to this section by a jury that is
specifically impaneled for this purpose.

P.  The
trier of fact shall make all factual determinations required by this section or
the Constitution of the United States or this state to impose a death
sentence.  If the defendant bears the burden of proof, the issue shall be determined
in the penalty phase.  If the state bears the burden of proof, the issue shall
be determined in the aggravation phase.

Q.  If
the death penalty was not alleged or was alleged but not imposed, the court
shall determine whether to impose a sentence of life or natural life pursuant
to subsection A of this section.  In determining whether to impose a
sentence of life or natural life, the court:

1.  May
consider any evidence introduced before sentencing or at any other sentencing
proceeding.

2.  Shall
consider the aggravating and mitigating circumstances listed in section 13‑701
and any statement made by a victim. 

R.  Subject
to section 13‑751, subsection B, a victim has the right to be present at
the aggravation phase and to present any information that is relevant to the
proceeding.  A victim has the right to be present and to present information at
the penalty phase.  At the penalty phase, the victim may present information
about the murdered person and the impact of the murder on the victim and other
family members and may submit a victim impact statement in any format to the
trier of fact.

S.  For
the purposes of this section:

1.  "Trier
of fact" means a jury unless the defendant and the state waive a jury, in
which case the trier of fact shall be the court.

2.  "Victim"
means the murdered person's spouse, parent, child, grandparent or sibling, any
other person related to the murdered person by consanguinity or affinity to the
second degree or any other lawful representative of the murdered person, except
if the spouse, parent, child, grandparent, sibling, other person related to the
murdered person by consanguinity or affinity to the second degree or other
lawful representative is in custody for an offense or is the accused. END_STATUTE

Sec. 4.  Section 13-1423, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE13-1423.  Violent
sexual assault; natural life sentence

A.  A
person is guilty of violent sexual assault if in the course of committing an
offense under section 13‑1404, 13‑1405, 13‑1406 or 13‑1410
the offense involved the discharge, use or threatening exhibition of a deadly
weapon or dangerous instrument or involved the intentional or knowing infliction
of serious physical injury and the person has a historical prior felony
conviction for a sexual offense under this chapter or any offense committed
outside this state that if committed in this state would constitute a sexual
offense under this chapter.

B.  Notwithstanding
section 13-703, section 13-704, section 13-705, section 13-706, subsection A
and section 13‑708, subsection D, a person who is at least eighteen years of age and
who is guilty
of a violent sexual assault shall be sentenced to life imprisonment and the
court shall order that the person not be released on any basis for the
remainder of the person's natural life. END_STATUTE

Sec. 5.  Section 13-2308.01, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE13-2308.01.  Terrorism;
classification

A.  It
is unlawful for a person to intentionally or knowingly do any of the following:

1.  Engage
in an act of terrorism.

2.  Organize,
manage, direct, supervise or finance an act of terrorism.

3.  Solicit,
incite or induce others to promote or further an act of terrorism.

4.  Without
lawful authority or when exceeding lawful authority, manufacture, sell,
deliver, display, use, make accessible to others, possess or exercise control
over a weapon of mass destruction knowing or having reason to know that the
device or object involved is a weapon of mass destruction.

5.  Make
property available to another, by transaction, transportation or otherwise, knowing
or having reason to know that the property is intended to facilitate an act of
terrorism.

6.  Provide
advice, assistance or direction in the conduct, financing or management of an
act of terrorism knowing or having reason to know that an act of terrorism
has occurred or may result by:

(a)  Harboring
or concealing any person or property.

(b)  Warning
any person of impending discovery, apprehension, prosecution or conviction. 
This subdivision does not apply to a warning that is given in connection with
an effort to bring another person into compliance with the law.

(c)  Providing
any person with material support or resources or any other means of avoiding
discovery, apprehension, prosecution or conviction.

(d)  Concealing
or disguising the nature, location, source, ownership or control of material
support or resources.

(e)  Preventing
or obstructing by means of force, deception or intimidation anyone from
performing an act that might aid in the discovery, apprehension, prosecution or
conviction of any person or that might aid in the prevention of an act of
terrorism.

(f)  Suppressing
by any act of concealment, alteration or destruction any physical evidence that
might aid in the discovery, apprehension, prosecution or conviction of any
person or that might aid in the prevention of an act of terrorism.

(g)  Concealing
the identity of any person.

7.  Provide
advice, assistance or direction in the conduct, financing or management of a
terrorist organization.

B.  A
violation of this section is a class 2 felony.

C.  A
person who is convicted of a violation of this section may be sentenced to
imprisonment in the custody of the state department of corrections for life or, if the person was
at least eighteen years of age at the time of the commission of the offense, natural life.  A
defendant who is sentenced to natural life is not eligible for commutation,
parole, work furlough, work release or release from confinement on any basis
for the remainder of the defendant's natural life.  A defendant who
is sentenced to life is not eligible for suspension of sentence, probation,
pardon or release from confinement on any basis except as specifically
authorized by section 13‑716 or section 31‑233, subsection A or B
until the completion of the service of twenty‑five calendar years or the
sentence is commuted.  If the defendant is not sentenced to life or
natural life, the defendant shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment as
follows:

Minimum                 Presumptive             Maximum

10 calendar
years       16 calendar years       25 calendar years END_STATUTE

Sec. 6.  Juveniles sentenced
to natural life or at least twenty‑five calendar years; commutation 

The supreme
court shall remand to the original sentencing court each case in which a person
was sentenced before the effective date of this act to natural life or to a
term of imprisonment, including consecutive sentences, of at least twenty‑five
calendar years for an offense that was committed before the person attained
eighteen years of age.  The original sentencing court shall strike the sentence
and enter in its place a sentence of either:

1.  If
the sentence was for natural life, life with the possibility for parole after
serving twenty‑five calendars years.

2.  If
the original sentence, including consecutive sentences, was for a term of at
least twenty‑five calendar years, a sentence with parole eligibility on
completion of the service of twenty‑five calendar years.

