

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 41-3801, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-3801.  Human
rights committee on persons with developmental disabilities

A.  The
human rights committee on persons with developmental disabilities is
established in the department of economic security to promote the rights of
clients who are receiving developmental disabilities services from the
department pursuant to title 36, chapter 5.1.

B.  The
committee shall be organized pursuant to this section and the requirements of
section 41‑3804.

C.  The
director of the department of economic security may establish additional
committees for each district office established pursuant to section 41‑1961
or to oversee the activities of any service provider.

D.  Each
human rights committee established pursuant to this section shall consist of at
least seven and not more than fifteen members appointed by the director of the
department of economic security with expertise in at least one of the following
areas:

1.  Psychology.

2.  Law.

3.  Medicine.

4.  Education.

5.  Special
education.

6.  Social
work.

7.  Criminal
justice.

E.  Each
human rights committee shall include at least two parents of children who
receive services from the division of developmental disabilities.

F.  The
division of developmental disabilities shall provide to each human rights
committee information regarding incidents of:

1.  Possible
abuse or neglect or violations of rights.

2.  Physical
abuse, sexual abuse and other abuse.

3.  Accidental
injury.

4.  Missing
clients.

5.  Behavioral
emergency measures.

6.  Medication
errors, including theft of medication or missing medication.

7.  Death.

8.  Suicide
attempts.

9.  Hospitalizations.

10.  Incarcerations.

11.  Theft
of client property or money.

12.  Property
destruction. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 41-3803, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-3803.  Human
rights committee on the mentally ill; training plan

A.  The
human rights committee on the mentally ill is established in the Arizona health
care cost containment system to promote the rights of persons who receive
behavioral health services pursuant to title 36, chapters 5 and 34.

B.  Each
region of the this state covered by
a regional behavioral health authority shall have at least one human rights
committee with the authority and responsibilities as prescribed by the Arizona
health care cost containment system administration pursuant to rules adopted by
the administration relating to behavioral health services. 

C.  The
director of the Arizona health care cost containment system administration may
establish additional committees to serve persons who receive behavioral health
services or to oversee the activities of any service provider.

D.  Each
committee established pursuant to this section shall consist of at least seven
and not more than fifteen members appointed by the director of the Arizona
health care cost containment system administration with expertise in at least
one of the following areas:

1.  Psychology.

2.  Law.

3.  Medicine.

4.  Education.

5.  Special
education.

6.  Social
work.

7.  Mental
health.

8.  Housing
for the mentally ill.

9.  Criminal
justice.

10.  Public
safety.

E.  Each
human rights committee, if appropriate, shall include at least two parents of
children who receive behavioral health services pursuant to title 36, chapter
34.

F.  Each
human rights committee shall include at least one member who is a current or
former client of the behavioral health system.

G.  Current
or former providers or employees of providers that have contracted with a
regional behavioral health authority may serve on a human rights committee.

H.  Each
human rights committee may hold one or more community forums annually to
receive comments regarding the experiences of individuals living with serious
mental illness, and their family members and caregivers, across the care
continuum.  

H.  I.  The department
of health services Arizona health care cost containment
system administration shall ensure that each regional behavioral health
authority and its providers develop and implement a human rights training plan
to ensure that providers are trained regarding clients' human rights and the
duties of the human rights committees. 

I.  J.  Each
committee shall be organized pursuant to this section and the requirements of
section 41‑3804. END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Section 41-3804, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-3804.  Human
rights committees; membership; duties; client information; immunity; violation;
classification

A.  Subject
to the approval of the appropriate department director, each committee
established pursuant to this article shall adopt guidelines that govern its
operation, including terms of members, quorum and attendance requirements and
removal of a committee member if necessary.  Each committee shall adopt these
guidelines by majority vote within the first three months of its
formation.  These guidelines shall not conflict with this
article.  The director of the appropriate department shall approve
the guidelines unless they are inconsistent with the department's statutes,
policies, procedures or rules, or if the guidelines do not promote
participation by all interested members of the community that the committee
serves.  In addition to the procedures in the guidelines, each human
rights committee must approve the removal of any committee member on majority
vote of the committee.  The appropriate department director
shall provide committee members the opportunity to review potential changes to
rules or policies that affect the committee.

B.  Employees
of the department of economic security, the department of child safety, the
Arizona health care cost containment system and the Arizona health care cost
containment system administration and subject‑matter
experts may serve on a committee only as nonvoting members whose
presence is not counted for the purpose of determining a quorum.

C.  Advocacy
groups, local advisory councils, committee members and the director of the
appropriate department may submit names of candidates to fill committee
vacancies.  The appropriate director shall appoint a person to fill a
vacancy subject to the approval of the committee.

D.  Each
committee shall meet at least quarterly each calendar year.

E.  Each
committee shall provide independent oversight to:

1.  Ensure
that the rights of clients are protected.

2.  Review
incidents of possible abuse, neglect or denial of a client's rights.

3.  Make
recommendations to the appropriate department director and the legislature
regarding laws, rules, policies, procedures and practices to ensure the
protection of the rights of clients receiving behavioral health and
developmental disability services.

F.  Each
committee shall submit written objections to specific problems or violations of
client rights by department employees or service providers to the director of
the appropriate department for review.  The appropriate department director
shall respond, in writing, to written objections within twenty‑one days
after receiving the objections. 

G.  Each
committee shall issue an annual report of its activities and recommendations
for changes to the director of the appropriate department, the president of the
senate, the speaker of the house of representatives and the chairpersons of the
senate health and human services committee and the house of representatives
health committee, or their successor committees.

H.  A
committee may request from the appropriate department the services of a
consultant or department employee to advise it on specific issues.  The
consultant may be a member of another human rights committee, a department
employee or a service provider.  Subject to the availability of monies, the
appropriate department shall assume the cost of the consultant.  A consultant
shall not participate in committee votes.

I.  Subject
to federal law, committee members and consultants have access to client
information and records, including quality of care reports and, on request,
case presentations, adult protective services investigation case status and
outcomes, substantiations, recommendations and other quality of care findings
from peer reviews or any successor report or process, maintained by the
appropriate department, provider or regional behavioral health authorities to
the extent necessary to conduct committee duties.  Each person who
receives information or records pursuant to this subsection shall maintain the
information or records as confidential and sign an agreement to comply with all
confidentiality requirements.  Any client information or records
shall be released to the committee without the designation of personally
identifiable information unless the personally identifiable information is
required for the official purposes of the committee.  A violation of
this subsection is a class 2 misdemeanor.  For the purposes of this subsection,
"personally identifiable information" includes a person's name,
address, date of birth, social security number, tribal enrollment number,
telephone or fax number, e‑mail address, social media identifier, driver
license number, places of employment, school identification or military
identification number or any other distinguishing characteristic that tends to
identify a particular person.  

J.  If
a committee's request for information or records from a department is denied,
the committee may request in writing that the director of the appropriate
department review this decision.  The agency director or designee shall conduct
the review within five business days after receiving the request for review. 
The agency shall bear the costs of conducting the review.  A final agency
decision made pursuant to this subsection is subject to judicial review
pursuant to title 12, chapter 7, article 6.  The agency shall not release any
information or records during the period an appeal may be filed or is pending.

K.  Confidential
records and information received by the committee or its consultant are subject
to the same provisions concerning subpoenas, discovery and use in legal actions
as are the original records and information.

L.  The
human rights committees may exchange information and engage in planning and
coordination activities between committee members in the performance of
committee duties pursuant to this section.

M.  The
human rights committees may encourage public awareness and involvement in their
activities by supporting committee members with affiliation agreements with
postsecondary education‑sponsored internship placements pursuant to the
appropriate department's approved operating procedures.

N.  The
appropriate departments shall coordinate education and training programs for
committee members to facilitate their role as human rights committee
members.  The appropriate departments shall coordinate statewide
meetings of committees at least every two years and provide staff for the
committees. 

O.  Any
person who, in good faith and without malice and in connection with duties or
functions of a committee established pursuant to this article, takes an action
or makes a decision or recommendation as a member or agent of a committee or
who furnishes records, information or assistance that is related to the duties
of a committee is not subject to liability for civil damages in consequence of
that action.  The court shall determine the presence of malice by clear and
convincing evidence. 

P.  Title
38, chapter 3, article 8, relating to conflict of interest, applies to all
committee members. END_STATUTE

