

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 41-2501, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-2501.  Applicability

A.  This
chapter applies only to procurements initiated after January 1, 1985
unless the parties agree to its application to procurements initiated before
that date.

B.  This
chapter applies to every expenditure of public monies, including federal
assistance monies except as otherwise specified in section 41‑2637, by
this state, acting through a state governmental unit as defined in this
chapter, under any contract, except that this chapter does not apply to either
grants as defined in this chapter, or contracts between this state and its
political subdivisions or other governments, except as provided in chapter 24
of this title and in article 10 of this chapter.  This chapter also
applies to the disposal of state materials. This chapter and rules adopted
under this chapter do not prevent any state governmental unit or political
subdivision from complying with the terms of any grant, gift, bequest or
cooperative agreement.

C.  All
political subdivisions and other local public agencies of this state may adopt
all or any part of this chapter and the rules adopted pursuant to this chapter.

D.  Notwithstanding
any other law, sections 41‑2517 and 41‑2546 apply to any agency as
defined in section 41‑1001, including the office of the governor.

E.  The
Arizona board of regents and the legislative and judicial branches of state
government are not subject to this chapter except as prescribed in subsection F
of this section.

F.  The
Arizona board of regents and the judicial branch shall adopt rules prescribing
procurement policies and procedures for themselves and institutions under their
jurisdiction.  The rules must be substantially equivalent to the
policies and procedures prescribed in this chapter.

G.  The
Arizona state lottery commission is exempt from this chapter for procurement
relating to the design and operation of the lottery or purchase of lottery
equipment, tickets and related materials.  The executive director of
the Arizona state lottery commission shall adopt rules substantially equivalent
to the policies and procedures in this chapter for procurement relating to the
design and operation of the lottery or purchase of lottery equipment, tickets
or related materials.  All other procurement shall be as prescribed by this
chapter.

H.  The
Arizona health care cost containment system administration is exempt from this
chapter for provider contracts pursuant to section 36‑2904, subsection A
and contracts for goods and services, including program contractor contracts
pursuant to title 36, chapter 29, articles 2 and 3 and contracts with regional behavioral health
authorities pursuant to title 36, chapter 34.  All other procurement,
including contracts for the statewide administrator of the program pursuant to
section 36‑2903, subsection B, shall be as prescribed by this chapter.

I.  Arizona
correctional industries is exempt from this chapter for purchases of raw materials,
components and supplies that are used in the manufacture or production of goods
or services for sale entered into pursuant to section 41‑1622.  All other
procurement shall be as prescribed by this chapter.

J.  The
state transportation board and the director of the department of transportation
are exempt from this chapter other than sections 41‑2517 and 41‑2586
and are subject to title 28, chapter 20 and 2 Code of Federal Regulations
section 200.317 for the procurement of the following:

1.  All
items of construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, preservation or
improvement undertaken on highway infrastructure.

2.  Engineering
services and any other work or activity to carry out engineering services
related to highway infrastructure.

3.  Right‑of‑way
services related to land titles, appraisals, real property acquisitions,
relocation services, property management and facility design.

4.  Any
other construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, preservation or improvement
work or activity that is required pursuant to title 28, chapter 20.

K.  The
Arizona highways magazine is exempt from this chapter for contracts for the
production, promotion, distribution and sale of the magazine and related
products and for contracts for sole source creative works entered into pursuant
to section 28‑7314, subsection A, paragraph 5.  All other procurement
shall be as prescribed by this chapter.

L.  The
secretary of state is exempt from this chapter for contracts entered into
pursuant to section 41‑1012 to publish and sell the administrative
code.  All other procurement shall be as prescribed by this chapter.

M.  This
chapter is not applicable to contracts for professional witnesses if the
purpose of such contracts is to provide for professional services or testimony
relating to an existing or probable judicial proceeding in which this state is
or may become a party or to contract for special investigative services for law
enforcement purposes.

N.  The
head of any state governmental unit, in relation to any contract exempted by
this section from this chapter, has the same authority to adopt rules,
procedures or policies as is delegated to the director pursuant to this
chapter.

O.  Agreements
negotiated by legal counsel representing this state in settlement of litigation
or threatened litigation are exempt from this chapter.

P.  This chapter is not
applicable to contracts entered into by the department of economic security: 

1.  With a provider
licensed or certified by an agency of this state to provide child day care services.


2.  With
area agencies on aging created pursuant to the older Americans act of 1965
(P.L. 89‑73; 79 Stat. 218; 42 United States Code sections 3001 through
3058ff).

3.  For
services pursuant to title 36, chapter 29, article 2.

4.  With
an eligible entity as defined by Public Law 105‑285, section
673(1)(A)(i), as amended, for designated community services block grant program
monies and any other monies given to the eligible entity that accomplishes the
purpose of Public Law 105‑285, section 672.

Q.  The
Arizona health care cost containment system may not require that persons with
whom it contracts follow this chapter for the purposes of subcontracts entered
into for the provision of the following:

1.  Mental
health services pursuant to section 36‑189, subsection B.

2.  Services
for the seriously mentally ill pursuant to title 36, chapter 5, article 10.

3.  Drug
and alcohol services pursuant to section 36‑141.

R.  The
department of health services may not require that persons with whom it
contracts follow this chapter for the purpose of subcontracts entered into for
the provision of domestic violence services pursuant to title 36, chapter 30,
article 1.

S.  The
department of health services is exempt from this chapter for contracts for
services of physicians at the Arizona state hospital.

T.  Contracts
for goods and services approved by the board of trustees of the public safety
personnel retirement system are exempt from this chapter.

U.  The
Arizona department of agriculture is exempt from this chapter with respect to
contracts for private labor and equipment to effect cotton or cotton stubble
plow‑up pursuant to rules adopted under title 3, chapter 2, article
1.

V.  The
Arizona state parks board is exempt from this chapter for purchases of guest
supplies and items for resale such as food, linens, gift items, sundries,
furniture, china, glassware and utensils for the facilities located in the
Tonto natural bridge state park.

W.  The
Arizona state parks board is exempt from this chapter for the purchase, production,
promotion, distribution and sale of publications, souvenirs and sundry items
obtained and produced for resale.

X.  The
Arizona state schools for the deaf and the blind are exempt from this chapter
for the purchase of textbooks and when purchasing products through a
cooperative that is organized and operates in accordance with state law if such
products are not available on a statewide contract and are related to the
operation of the schools or are products for which special discounts are
offered for educational institutions.

Y.  Expenditures
of monies in the morale, welfare and recreational fund established by section
26‑153 are exempt from this chapter.

Z.  Notwithstanding
section 41‑2534, the director of the state department of corrections may
contract with local medical providers in counties with a population of less
than four hundred thousand persons for the following purposes:

1.  To
acquire hospital and professional medical services for inmates who are
incarcerated in state department of corrections facilities that are located in
those counties.

2.  To
ensure the availability of emergency medical services to inmates in all
counties by contracting with the closest medical facility that offers emergency
treatment and stabilization.

AA.  The
department of environmental quality is exempt from this chapter for contracting
for procurements relating to the water quality assurance revolving fund program
established pursuant to title 49, chapter 2, article 5.  The department shall
engage in a source selection process that is similar to the procedures
prescribed by this chapter.  The department may contract for remedial
actions with a single selection process.  The exclusive remedy for
disputes or claims relating to contracting pursuant to this subsection is as
prescribed by article 9 of this chapter and the rules adopted pursuant to that
article.  All other procurement by the department shall be as prescribed by
this chapter.

BB.  The
motor vehicle division of the department of transportation is exempt from this
chapter for third‑party authorizations pursuant to title 28, chapter 13,
only if all of the following conditions exist:

1.  The
division does not pay any public monies to an authorized third party.

2.  Exclusivity
is not granted to an authorized third party.

3.  The
director has complied with the requirements prescribed in title 28,
chapter 13 in selecting an authorized third party.

CC.  This
section does not exempt third‑party authorizations pursuant to title 28,
chapter 13 from any other applicable law.

DD.  The
state forester is exempt from this chapter for purchases and contracts relating
to wildland fire suppression and pre‑positioning equipment resources and
for other activities related to combating wildland fires and other unplanned
risk activities, including fire, flood, earthquake, wind and hazardous material
responses.  All other procurement by the state forester shall be as prescribed
by this chapter.

EE.  The
cotton research and protection council is exempt from this chapter for procurements.

FF.  The
Arizona commerce authority is exempt from this chapter, except article 10 for
the purpose of cooperative purchases.  The authority shall adopt policies,
procedures and practices, in consultation with the department of
administration, that are similar to and based on the policies and procedures
prescribed by this chapter for the purpose of increased public confidence, fair
and equitable treatment of all persons engaged in the process and fostering
broad competition while accomplishing flexibility to achieve the authority's
statutory requirements.  The authority shall make its policies,
procedures and practices available to the public.  The authority may
exempt specific expenditures from the policies, procedures and practices. 

GG.  The
Arizona exposition and state fair board is exempt from this chapter for
contracts for professional entertainment.

HH.  This
chapter does not apply to the purchase of water, gas or electric utilities.

II.  This
chapter does not apply to professional certifications, professional memberships
and conference registrations.

JJ.  The
department of gaming is exempt from this chapter for problem gambling treatment
services contracts with licensed behavioral health professionals.

KK.  This
chapter does not apply to contracts for credit reporting services.

LL.  This
chapter does not apply to contracts entered into by the department of child
safety: 

1.  With
a provider of family foster care pursuant to section 8‑503. 

2.  With
an eligible entity as defined by Public Law 105‑285, section
673(1)(A)(i), as amended, for designated community services block grant program
monies and any other monies given to the eligible entity that accomplishes the
purpose of Public Law 105‑285, section 672.

MM.  This
chapter does not apply to contracts entered into by the department of economic
security with a financial institution to serve as a program manager and
depository under section 46‑903.

NN.  The Arizona power
authority is exempt from this chapter. END_STATUTE

