

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 41-1402, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-1402.  Powers
and duties of the division

A.  The
division may:

1.  Employ
an executive director for the board and other necessary personnel whose
compensation shall be as determined pursuant to section 38‑611.

2.  Subject
to the provisions and restrictions of this chapter, cooperate with and enter
into agreements with the United States equal employment opportunity commission,
the United States department of housing and urban development and other United
States agencies interested in practices governed by this chapter, accept monies
from those agencies and carry out and perform the covenants and conditions of
any written agreement with those agencies not inconsistent with or beyond this
chapter.

3.  Cooperate
with and enter into agreements with state and local agencies not inconsistent
with or beyond this chapter.

4.  Intervene
in a civil action brought under section 41‑1481 by a complainant against
a defendant other than the state.

5.  After
studying recommendations of the board, issue, amend or rescind procedural rules
to carry out this chapter.

6.  Make
periodic surveys of the existence and effect of discrimination because of race,
color, religion, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity, veteran status, age, disability, familial status
or national origin in the enjoyment of civil rights by any person within this
state as prescribed by this chapter.

7.  Foster,
through community effort, in cooperation with both public and private groups,
the elimination of discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation,
gender identity, veteran status, age,
disability, familial status or national origin.

8.  Issue
publications of results of studies, investigations and research as in its
judgment will tend to promote goodwill and the elimination of discrimination
between persons because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity, veteran status,
age, disability, familial status or national origin.

9.  Furnish
persons subject to this chapter with such assistance as may be reasonably
necessary to further compliance with this chapter.

B.  The
division shall:

1.  Administer
this chapter.

2.  Report
from time to time, but not less than once a year in December, to the
legislature and the governor, describing its activities and accomplishments
during the year, and file with each report a copy of all recommendations of the
division as to additional remedial action by legislative enactment or
otherwise. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 41-1441, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-1441.  Definitions

In this
article, unless the context otherwise requires:

1.  "Gender
identity" means the gender‑related identity, appearance or
mannerisms or other gender‑related characteristics of an individual,
regardless of the individual's designated sex at birth.

1.  2.  "Person"
means an individual, corporation, partnership, unincorporated association, or
other organization, and includes the owner, lessee, operator, proprietor,
manager, superintendent, agent, 
or employee of any place of public accommodation.

2.  3.  "Places of public
accommodation" means all public places of entertainment, amusement or
recreation, all public places where food or beverages are sold for consumption
on the premises, all public places which
that are conducted for the lodging of
transients or for the benefit, use or accommodation of those seeking health or
recreation and all establishments which
that cater or offer their services,
facilities or goods to or solicit patronage from the members of the general
public.  Any dwelling as defined in section 41‑1491, or any
private club, or any place which that is in its nature distinctly
private is not a place of public accommodation.

4.  "Sexual
orientation" means homosexuality, heterosexuality or bisexuality. 

5.  "Veteran
status" means having served on active duty in the armed forces of the
United States.
END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Section 41-1442, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-1442.  Discrimination
in places of public accommodation; exceptions

A.  Discrimination
in places of public accommodation against any person because of race, color,
religion, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity, veteran status, national origin or ancestry is
contrary to the policy of this state and shall be deemed unlawful.

B.  No
person, directly or indirectly, shall refuse to, withhold from or deny to any
person, nor aid in or incite the refusal to deny or withhold, accommodations,
advantages, facilities or privileges thereof because of race, color, religion,
sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity, veteran status, national origin or ancestry, nor
shall distinction be made with respect to any person based on race, color,
religion, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity, veteran status, national origin or ancestry in
connection with the price or quality of any item, goods or services offered by
or at any place of public accommodation.

C.  Any
person who is under the influence of alcohol or narcotics, who is guilty of
boisterous conduct, who is of lewd or immoral character, who is physically
violent or who violates any regulation of any place of public accommodation
that applies to all persons regardless of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation,
gender identity, veteran status, national
origin or ancestry may be excluded from any place of public accommodation and
nothing in this article shall be considered to limit the right of such
exclusion.

D.  Notwithstanding
any other provision of this article and except as required by federal law, it
is not an unlawful practice if a person fails to provide a trained and
competent bilingual person who is skilled in interpreting a language other than
English to assist a person who is seeking services at a place of public
accommodation.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article and except
as required by federal law, a person who offers a service at a place of public
accommodation is not required to provide a person who is seeking the service
any form or other documentation in that person's native language.

E.  It
is not an unlawful practice pursuant to this section for a person to fail to
provide service at a place of public accommodation if by providing the service
the person offering the service would violate a state or federal law or a rule
that is adopted by a state or federal board, commission or agency that has
jurisdiction over the person offering the service. END_STATUTE

Sec. 4.  Section 41-1461, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-1461.  Definitions

In this
article, unless the context otherwise requires:

1.  "Auxiliary
aids and services" includes:

(a)  Qualified
interpreters or other effective methods of making aurally delivered materials
available to individuals with hearing impairments.

(b)  Qualified
readers, taped texts or other effective methods of making visually delivered
materials available to individuals with visual impairments.

(c)  Acquisition
or modification of equipment or devices.

(d)  Other
similar services and actions.

2.  "Being
regarded as having such a physical or mental impairment":

(a)  Means
an individual who establishes that the individual has been subjected to an
action prohibited under this article because of an actual or perceived physical
or mental impairment whether or not the impairment limits or is perceived to
limit a major life activity.

(b)  Does
not mean an impairment that is transitory and minor.  For the purposes of this
subdivision, "transitory impairment" means an impairment with an
actual or expected duration of six months or less.

3.  "Covered
entity" means an employer, employment agency, labor organization or joint
labor‑management committee.

4.  "Disability"
means, with respect to an individual, except any impairment caused by current
use of illegal drugs, any of the following:

(a)  A
physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the
major life activities of the individual.

(b)  A
record of such a physical or mental impairment.

(c)  Being
regarded as having such a physical or mental impairment.

5.  "Employee":

(a)  Means
an individual employed by an employer. 

(b)  Does
not include an elected public official of this state or any political
subdivision of this state, any person chosen by an elected official to be on
the elected official's personal staff, an appointee on the policymaking level
or an immediate adviser with respect to the exercise of the constitutional or
legal powers of the office, unless the person or appointee is subject to the
civil service laws of this state or any political subdivision of this state.

6.  "Employer":

(a)  Means
a person who has fifteen or more employees for each working day in each of
twenty or more calendar weeks in the current or preceding calendar year, and
any agent of that person, except that to the extent that any person is alleged
to have committed any act of sexual harassment, employer means, for purposes of
administrative and civil actions regarding those allegations of sexual
harassment, a person who has one or more employees in the current or preceding
calendar year. 

(b)  Does
not include either:

(i)  The
United States or any department or agency of the United States, a corporation
wholly owned by the government of the United States or an Indian tribe.

(ii)  A
bona fide private membership club, other than a labor organization, that is
exempt from taxation under section 501(c) of the internal revenue code of 1954.

7.  "Employment
agency" means any person regularly undertaking with or without
compensation to procure employees for an employer or to procure for employees
opportunities to work for an employer and includes an agent of that person.

8.  "Gender
identity" means the gender‑related identity, appearance or
mannerisms or other gender‑related characteristics of an individual,
regardless of the individual's designated sex at birth.

8.  9.  "Labor
organization":

(a)  Means
a labor organization and any agent of a labor organization.

(b)  Includes:

(i)  Any
organization of any kind, any agency or employee representation committee,
group, association or plan in which fifteen or more employees participate and
that exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of dealing with employers
concerning grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours or other
terms or conditions of employment. 

(ii)  Any
conference, general committee, joint or system board or joint council that is
subordinate to a national or international labor organization.

9.  10.  "Major life
activities" includes:

(a)  Caring
for oneself, performing manual tasks, seeing, hearing, eating, sleeping,
walking, standing, lifting, bending, speaking, breathing, learning, reading,
concentrating, thinking, communicating and working.

(b)  The
operation of a major bodily function, including functions of the immune system,
normal cell growth and digestive, bowel, bladder, neurological, brain,
respiratory, circulatory, endocrine and reproductive functions.

10.  11.  "Person"
means one or more individuals, governmental agencies, political subdivisions,
labor unions, partnerships, associations, corporations, legal representatives,
mutual companies, joint‑stock companies, trusts, unincorporated
organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy or receivers.

11.  12.  "Qualified
individual" means a person with a disability who, with or without
reasonable accommodation, is capable of performing the essential functions of
the employment position that the individual holds or desires.

12.  13.  "Reasonable
accommodation" includes:

(a)  Making
existing facilities used by employees readily accessible to and usable by
individuals with disabilities.

(b)  Job
restructuring, part‑time or modified work schedules, reassignment to a
vacant position, acquisition or modification of equipment or devices,
appropriate adjustment or modification of examinations, training materials or
policies, the provision of qualified readers, taped texts or other effective
methods of making visually delivered materials available to individuals with
visual impairments, the provision of auxiliary aids and services or
interpreters and other similar services and actions for individuals with
disabilities.

13.  14.  "Religion"
means all aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as belief. 
Unlawful practices as prohibited by this article include practices with respect
to religion unless an employer demonstrates that the employer is unable to
reasonably accommodate to an employee's or prospective
employee's religious observance or practice without undue hardship on the
conduct of the employer's business.

15.  "Sexual
orientation" means homosexuality, heterosexuality or bisexuality.

14.  16.  "Undue hardship":

(a)  Means
an action requiring significant difficulty or expense when considered in light
of the factors set forth in subdivision (b) of this paragraph.

(b)  When
determining whether an accommodation would impose an undue hardship on a
covered entity, factors to be considered include:

(i)  The
nature and cost of the accommodations needed under this article.

(ii)  The
overall financial resources of the facility or facilities involved in the
provision of the reasonable accommodation, the number of persons employed at
the facility, the effect on expenses and resources of the facility and any
other impact of the accommodation on the operation of the facility.

(iii)  The
overall financial resources of the covered entity, the overall size of the
business of the covered entity with respect to the number of its employees and
the number, type and location of its facilities.

(iv)  The
type of operation or operations of the covered entity, including the
composition, structure and functions of the workforce of the covered entity.

(v)  The
geographic separateness and the administrative or fiscal relationship of the
facility to the covered entity.

17.  "Veteran
status" means having served on active duty in the armed forces of the
United States.
END_STATUTE

Sec. 5.  Section 41-1463, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-1463.  Discrimination;
unlawful practices; definition

A.  Nothing
contained in this article shall be interpreted to require that the less
qualified be preferred over the better qualified simply because of race, color,
religion, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity, age
or national origin or on the basis of disability or veteran status.

B.  It
is an unlawful employment practice for an employer:

1.  To
fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any individual or otherwise to
discriminate against any individual with respect to the individual's
compensation, terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of the
individual's race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity, age
or national origin or on the basis of disability or veteran status.

2.  To
limit, segregate or classify employees or applicants for employment in any way which that would deprive or tend to deprive
any individual of employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect the
individual's status as an employee, because of the individual's race, color,
religion, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity, age
or national origin or on the basis of disability or veteran status.

3.  To
fail or refuse to hire, to discharge,  or to otherwise discriminate
against any individual based on the results of a genetic test received by the
employer, notwithstanding subsection I, paragraph 2 of this section.

C.  It
is an unlawful employment practice for an employment agency to fail or refuse
to refer for employment or otherwise to discriminate against any individual
because of the individual's race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity, age
or national origin or on the basis of disability or veteran status or to classify or refer for
employment any individual on the basis of the individual's race, color,
religion, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity, age
or national origin or on the basis of disability or veteran status.

D.  It
is an unlawful employment practice for a labor organization:

1.  To
exclude or to expel from its membership or otherwise to discriminate against
any individual because of the individual's race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation,
gender identity, age
or national origin or on the basis of disability or veteran status.

2.  To
limit, segregate or classify its membership or applicants for membership or to
classify or fail or refuse to refer for employment any individual in any way which that would deprive or tend to deprive
the individual of employment opportunities or would limit those employment
opportunities or otherwise adversely affect the individual's status as an
employee or as an applicant for employment because of the individual's race,
color, religion, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity, age
or national origin or on the basis of disability or veteran status.

3.  To
cause or attempt to cause an employer to discriminate against an individual in
violation of this section.

E.  It
is an unlawful employment practice for any employer, labor organization or
joint labor‑management committee controlling apprenticeship or other
training or retraining programs, including on‑the‑job training
programs, to discriminate against any individual because of the individual's
race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, age or national origin or on the
basis of disability or
veteran status in
admission to or employment in any program established to provide apprenticeship
or other training and, if the individual is an otherwise qualified individual,
to fail or refuse to reasonably accommodate the individual's disability.

F.  With
respect to a qualified individual, it is an unlawful employment practice for a
covered entity to:

1.  Participate
in any contractual or other arrangement or relationship that has the effect of
subjecting a qualified individual who applies with or who is employed by the
covered entity to unlawful employment discrimination on the basis of
disability.

2.  Use
standards, criteria or methods of administration that have the effect of
discriminating on the basis of disability or that perpetuate the discrimination
of others who are subject to common administrative control.

3.  Exclude
or otherwise deny equal jobs or benefits to an individual qualified for the job
or benefits because of the known disability of an individual with whom the
individual qualified for the job or benefits is known to have a relationship or
association.

4.  Not
make reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of
an otherwise qualified individual who is an applicant or employee unless the
covered entity can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue
hardship on the operation of the business of the covered entity or the
individual only meets the definition of disability as prescribed in section 41‑1461,
paragraph 4, subdivision (c).

5.  Deny
employment opportunities to a job applicant or employee who is an otherwise
qualified individual if the denial is based on the need of the covered entity
to make reasonable accommodation to the physical or mental impairment of the
applicant or employee.

6.  Use
qualification standards, employment tests or other selection criteria,
including those based on an individual's uncorrected vision, that screen out or
tend to screen out an individual with a disability or a class of individuals
with disabilities, unless the standard, test or other selection criteria, as
used by the covered entity, is shown to be job related for the position in
question and is consistent with business necessity.

7.  Fail
to select and administer tests relating to employment in the most effective
manner to ensure that, when the test is administered to a job applicant or
employee who has a disability that impairs sensory, manual or speaking skills,
the test results accurately reflect the skills or aptitude or whatever other
factor of the applicant or employee that the test purports to measure, rather
than reflecting the impaired sensory, manual or speaking skills of the
applicant or employee, except if the skills are the factors that the test
purports to measure.

G.  Notwithstanding
any other provision of this article, it is not an unlawful employment practice:

1.  For
an employer to hire and employ employees, for an employment agency to classify
or refer for employment any individual, for a labor organization to classify
its membership or classify or refer for employment any individual,  or for an employer, labor
organization or joint labor‑management committee controlling
apprenticeship or other training or retraining programs to admit or employ any
individual in any such program, on the basis of the individual's religion, sex
or national origin in those certain instances when religion, sex or national
origin is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the
normal operation of that particular business or enterprise, provided that if
sex is a bona fide occupational qualification individuals are recognized as
qualified based on their gender identity.

2.  For
any school, college, university or other educational institution or institution
of learning to hire and employ employees of a particular religion if the
school, college, university or other educational institution or institution of
learning is in whole or in substantial part owned, supported, controlled or
managed by a particular religion or religious corporation, association or
society, or if the curriculum of the school, college, university or other
educational institution or institution of learning is directed toward the
propagation of a particular religion.

3.  For
an employer to fail or refuse to hire or employ any individual for any
position, for an employment agency to fail or refuse to refer any individual
for employment in any position or for a labor organization to fail or refuse to
refer any individual for employment in any position, if both of the following
apply:

(a)  The
occupancy of the position or access to the premises in or upon on which any part of the duties of
the position are performed or are to be performed is subject to any requirement
imposed in the interest of the national security of the United States under any
security program in effect pursuant to or administered under any statute of the
United States or any executive order of the president of the United States.

(b)  The
individual has not fulfilled or has ceased to fulfill that requirement.

4.  With
respect to age, for an employer, employment agency or labor organization:

(a)  To
take any action otherwise prohibited under subsection B, C or D of this section
if age is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the
normal operation of the particular business or if the differentiation is based
on reasonable factors other than age.

(b)  To
observe the terms of a bona fide seniority system or any bona fide employee
benefit plan such as a retirement, pension, deferred compensation or insurance
plan, which is not a subterfuge to evade the purposes of the age discrimination
provisions of this article, except that no employee benefit plan may excuse the
failure to hire any individual and no seniority system or employee benefit plan
may require or permit the involuntary retirement of any individual specified by
section 41‑1465 because of the individual's age.

(c)  To
discharge or otherwise discipline an individual for good cause.

H.  As
used in this article, unlawful employment practice does not include any action
or measure taken by an employer, labor organization, joint labor‑management
committee or employment agency with respect to an individual who is a member of
the communist party of the United States or of any other organization required
to register as a communist‑action or communist‑front organization
by final order of the subversive activities control board pursuant to the
subversive activities control act of 1950.

I.  Notwithstanding
any other provision of this article, it is not an unlawful employment practice:

1.  For
an employer to apply different standards of compensation or different terms,
conditions or privileges of employment pursuant to a bona fide seniority or
merit system or a system which that measures earnings by quantity or
quality of production or to employees who work in different locations, provided
that these differences are not the result of an intention to discriminate
because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity, veteran status or
national origin.

2.  For
an employer to give and act upon on the results of any professionally
developed ability test provided that the test, its administration or action upon on the results is not designed,
intended or used to discriminate because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity, veteran status or national origin.

3.  For
any employer to differentiate upon
on the basis of sex or disability in
determining the amount of the wages or compensation paid or to be paid to
employees of the employer if the differentiation is authorized by the
provisions of section 6(d) or section 14 of the fair labor standards act of
1938, as amended (29 United States Code section 206(d)).

J.  Nothing
contained in this chapter applies to any business or enterprise on or near an
Indian reservation with respect to any publicly announced employment practice
of the business or enterprise under which a preferential treatment is given to
any individual because the individual is an Indian living on or near a
reservation.

K.  Nothing
contained in this article or article 6 of this chapter requires any employer,
employment agency, labor organization or joint labor‑management committee
subject to this article to grant preferential treatment to any individual or
group because of the race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity, veteran status
or national origin of the individual or group on account of an imbalance which that may exist with respect to the
total number or percentage of persons of any race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation,
gender identity, veteran status
or national origin employed by any employer, referred or classified for
employment by any employment agency or labor organization, admitted to
membership or classified by any labor organization or admitted to or employed
in any apprenticeship or other training program, in comparison with the total
number or percentage of persons of that race, color, religion, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity, veteran status or national origin in any
community, state, section or other area, or in the available work force workforce in any community, state, section
or other area.

L.  Nothing
in the age discrimination prohibitions of this article may be construed to
prohibit compulsory retirement of any employee who has attained sixty‑five
years of age and who, for the two-year period immediately before retirement, is
employed in a bona fide executive or high policymaking position, if the
employee is entitled to an immediate nonforfeitable annual retirement benefit
from a pension, profit sharing, savings or deferred compensation plan or any
combination of plans of the employer for the employee, which that equals, in the aggregate, at least
forty‑four thousand dollars.  In applying the retirement benefit test of
this subsection, if any retirement benefit is in a form other than a straight
life annuity, with no ancillary benefits, or if employees contribute to the
plan or make rollover contributions, the benefit shall be adjusted in
accordance with rules adopted by the division so the benefit is the equivalent
of a straight life annuity, with no ancillary benefits, under a plan to which
employees do not contribute and under which no rollover contributions are made.

M.  A
covered entity may require that an individual with a disability shall not pose
a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals in the
workplace.  For the purposes of this subsection, "direct
threat" means a significant risk to the health or safety of others that
cannot be eliminated by reasonable accommodation.

N.  This
article does not alter the standards for determining eligibility for benefits
under this state's workers' compensation laws or under state and federal
disability benefit programs.

O.  For
the purposes of this section and section 41‑1481, with respect to
employers or employment practices involving a disability,
"individual" means a qualified individual. END_STATUTE

Sec. 6.  Section 41-1464, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-1464.  Other
unlawful employment practices; opposition to unlawful practices; filing of
charges; participation in proceedings; notices and advertisements for
employment

A.  It
is an unlawful employment practice for an employer to discriminate against any of his employees or applicants for
employment, for an employment agency or joint labor‑management committee
controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining programs, including
on‑the‑job training programs, to discriminate against any
individual or for a labor organization to discriminate against any member or
applicant for membership because the member or applicant has opposed any
practice which that is an unlawful employment practice
under this article or has made a charge, testified, assisted or participated in
any manner in an investigation, proceeding or hearing under article 6 of this
chapter.

B.  It
is an unlawful employment practice for
an employer, labor organization, employment agency or joint labor‑management
committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining programs,
including on‑the‑job training programs, to print or publish or
cause to be printed or published any notice or advertisement relating to
employment by such an employer or membership in or
any classification or referral for employment by such a labor organization, or relating to any classification or referral
for employment by such an employment agency or relating to admission or to employment in any program
established to provide apprenticeship or other training by such a joint labor‑management
committee indicating any preference, limitation, specification or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity, veteran status
or national origin, except that such a notice or advertisement may indicate a
preference, limitation, specification or discrimination based on religion, sex
or national origin when religion, sex or national origin is a bona fide
occupational qualification for employment, provided that if sex is a bona
fide occupational qualification individuals are recognized as qualified based
on their gender identity.

C.  It
is unlawful for an employer, labor organization or employment agency to print
or publish or cause to be printed or published any notice or advertisement
relating to employment by an employer or membership in or any classification or
referral for employment by a labor organization or relating to any classification
or referral for employment by a labor organization or relating to any classification
or referral for employment by an employment agency, indicating any preference,
limitation, specification or discrimination based on age, except such a that the notice or advertisement may
indicate a preference, limitation, specification or discrimination based on age
when age is a bona fide occupational qualification for employment. END_STATUTE

Sec. 7.  Section 41-1481, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-1481.  Filing
charges; investigation; findings; conciliation; compliance proceedings;
appeals; attorney fees; violation; classification

A.  A
charge under this section shall be filed within one hundred eighty days after
the alleged unlawful employment practice occurred.  A charge is
deemed filed upon on receipt by the division from or on
behalf of a person claiming to be aggrieved or, if filed by a member of the
division, when executed by such member upon on oath or affirmation.  A
charge is deemed filed by or on behalf of a person claiming to be aggrieved if
received from the United States equal employment opportunity
commission.  A charge shall be in writing upon on oath or affirmation and shall
contain such information, including the date, place and circumstances of the
alleged unlawful employment practice, and be in such form as the division
requires.  Charges shall not be made public by the division.

B.  Whenever
a charge is filed by or on behalf of a person claiming to be aggrieved or by a
member of the division, referred to as the charging party, alleging that an
employer, employment agency, labor organization or joint labor‑management
committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining programs,
including on‑the‑job training programs, has engaged in an unlawful
employment practice, the division shall serve notice of and a copy of the
charge on such employer, employment agency, labor organization or joint labor‑management
committee, referred to as the respondent, within ten days and shall make an
investigation of the charge.  If the division determines after such
investigation that there is not reasonable cause to believe that the charge is
true, it shall enter an order determining the same and dismissing the charge
and shall notify the charging party and the respondent of its action.  If
the division determines after such investigation that there is reasonable cause
to believe that the charge is true, it shall enter an order containing its
findings of fact and shall endeavor to eliminate the alleged unlawful
employment practice by informal methods of conference, conciliation and
persuasion.  Any party to such informal proceeding may be represented
by counsel.  Counsel need not be a member of the state bar if he is
licensed to practice law in any other state or territory of the United States.  Nothing
said or done during and as a part of such informal endeavors may be made public
by the division or its officers or employees or used as evidence in a
subsequent proceeding without the written consent of the persons concerned.  If
a civil action resulting from a charge is commenced in any federal or state
court, evidence collected by or submitted to the division during the
investigation of the charge and the source of the evidence shall be subject to
discovery by the parties to the civil action.  Any person who makes
public information in violation of this subsection is guilty of a class 1
misdemeanor.  The division shall make its determination on reasonable
cause as promptly as possible and as far as practicable not later than sixty
days from after the filing of the
charge.  If more than two years have elapsed after the alleged
unlawful employment practice occurred, and if the charging party has received a
notice of right to sue, the division may cease investigation of a charge
without reaching a determination.

C.  All
conciliation agreements shall provide that the charging party waives, releases
and covenants not to sue the respondent or claim against the respondent in any
forum with respect to the matters which
that were alleged as charges filed with
the division, subject to performance by the respondent of the promises and
representations contained in the conciliation agreement.  The charging party or
the respondent may prepare a conciliation agreement which that the division shall submit to the
other party and which that, if accepted by the other party,
shall be accepted by the division.

D.  If
within thirty days after the division has made a determination that reasonable
cause exists to believe that the charge is true the division has not accepted a
conciliation agreement to which the charging party and the respondent are
parties, the division may bring a civil action against the respondent, other
than the state, named in the charge.  The charging party shall have
the right to intervene in a civil action brought by the division.  If
a charge filed with the division pursuant to subsection A of this section is
dismissed by the division or if within ninety days from after the filing of such charge the
division has not filed a civil action under this section or has not entered
into a conciliation agreement with the charging party, the division shall so
notify the charging party.  Within ninety days after the giving of
such notice a civil action may be brought against the respondent named in the
charge by the charging party or, if such charge was filed by a member of the
division, by any person whom the charge alleges was aggrieved by the alleged
unlawful employment practice.  In no event shall any action be
brought pursuant to this article more than one year after the charge to which
the action relates has been filed.  Upon On application by the complainant and
in such circumstances as the court may deem just, the court may appoint an
attorney for such complainant and may authorize the commencement of the action
without the payment of fees, costs or security. Upon On timely application, the court may
in its discretion permit the division to intervene in civil actions in which
the state is not a defendant upon
on certification that the case is of
general public importance.  Upon On request the court may stay further
proceedings for not more than sixty days pending the further efforts of the
parties or the division to obtain voluntary compliance.

E.  Whenever
a charge is filed with the division and the division concludes on the basis of
a preliminary investigation that prompt judicial action is necessary to carry
out the purposes of this article or article 4 of this chapter, the division may
bring an action for appropriate temporary or preliminary relief pending final
disposition of such charge. Any temporary restraining order or other order
granting preliminary or temporary relief shall be issued in accordance with the
supreme
court Arizona rules of civil
procedure.  The court having jurisdiction over such proceedings shall
assign such action for hearing at the earliest practicable date and cause the
action to be expedited in every way.

F.  The
court shall assign any action brought under this article for hearing at the
earliest practicable date and cause the action to be in every way
expedited.  If the action has not been scheduled for trial within one
hundred twenty days after issue has been joined, the judge may appoint a master
pursuant to rule 53 of the supreme
court Arizona rules of civil procedure.

G.  If
the court finds that the defendant has intentionally engaged in or is
intentionally engaging in an unlawful employment practice alleged in the
complaint, the court may enjoin the defendant from engaging in such unlawful
employment practice and order such affirmative action as may be
appropriate.  Affirmative action may include, but is not limited to,
reinstatement or hiring of employees with or without back pay payable by the
employer, employment agency or labor organization responsible for the unlawful employment
practice or any other equitable relief as the court deems
appropriate.  Back pay liability shall not accrue from a date more
than two years prior
to before the filing of the charge with the
division.  Interim earnings or amounts earnable with reasonable
diligence by the person or persons discriminated against shall reduce the back
pay otherwise allowable.  No order of the court shall require the
admission or reinstatement of an individual as a member of a union or the
hiring, reinstatement or promotion of an individual as an employee or the
payment to him of any back pay if such individual was refused admission,
suspended or expelled or was refused employment or advancement or was suspended
or discharged for any reason other than discrimination on account of race,
color, religion, sex,
sexual orientation, gender identity, age, disability, veteran status or national origin or a violation
of section 41‑1464.

H.  In
any case in which an employer, employment agency or labor organization fails to
comply with an order of a court issued in a civil action brought under this
section, a party to the action or the division upon on the written request of a person
aggrieved by such failure may commence proceedings to compel compliance with
such order.

I.  Any
civil action brought under this section and any proceedings brought under
subsection H of this section are subject to appeal as provided in sections 12‑120.21,
12‑120.22 and 12‑120.24.

J.  In
any action or proceeding under this section the court may allow the prevailing
party, other than the division, a reasonable attorney's fee as part of the
costs. END_STATUTE

Sec. 8.  Section 41-1491, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-1491.  Definitions

In this
article, unless the context otherwise requires:

1.  "Aggrieved
person" includes any person who either:

(a)  Claims
to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice.

(b)  Believes
that he will be injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to
occur.

2.  "Complainant"
means a person, including the attorney general, who files a complaint under
section 41‑1491.22.

3.  "Conciliation"
means the attempted resolution of issues raised by a complaint or by the
investigation of the complaint through informal negotiations involving the
aggrieved person, the respondent and the attorney general.

4.  "Conciliation
agreement" means a written agreement setting forth the resolution of the
issues in conciliation.

5.  "Disability"
means a mental or physical impairment that substantially limits at least one
major life activity, a record of such an impairment or being regarded as having
such an impairment.  Disability does not include current illegal use of or
addiction to any drug or illegal or federally controlled substance.  Disability
shall be defined and construed as the term is defined and construed by the
Americans with disabilities act of 1990 (P.L. 101‑336) and the ADA
amendments act of 2008 (P.L. 110‑325; 122 Stat. 3553).

6.  "Discriminatory
housing practice" means an act prohibited by sections 41‑1491.14
through 41‑1491.21.

7.  "Dwelling"
means either:

(a)  Any
building, structure or part of a building or structure that is occupied as, or designed
or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families.

(b)  Any
vacant land that is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location
of a building, structure or part of a building or structure described by
subdivision (a) of this paragraph.

8.  "Family"
includes a single individual.

9.  "Gender
identity" means the gender‑related identity, APPEARANCE or
mannerisms or other gender‑related characteristics of an individual,
regardless of the individual's designated sex at birth.

9.  10.  "Person"
means one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor
organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies,
trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, receivers, fiduciaries, banks,
credit unions and financial institutions.

10.  11.  "Respondent"
means either:

(a)  The
person accused of a violation of this article in a complaint of a
discriminatory housing practice.

(b)  Any
person identified as an additional or substitute respondent under section 41‑1491.25
or an agent of an additional or substitute respondent.

12.  "Sexual
orientation" means homosexuality, heterosexuality or bisexuality.

11.  13.  "To rent"
includes to lease, to sublease, to let or to otherwise grant for a consideration
the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.

14.  "Veteran
status" means having served on active duty in the armed forces of the
United States.
END_STATUTE

Sec. 9.  Section 41-1491.05, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-1491.05.  Appraisal
exemption

This
article does not prohibit a person engaged in the business of furnishing
appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors other than
race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability, familial status, veteran status or national origin. END_STATUTE

Sec. 10.  Section 41-1491.14, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

END_STATUTE41-1491.14.  Discrimination in
sale or rental

A.  A
person may not refuse to sell or rent after a bona fide offer has been made or
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable or
deny a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation,
gender identity, familial
status,
veteran status
or national origin.

B.  A
person may not discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in providing services or
facilities in connection with the sale or rental, because of race, color,
religion, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity, familial
status,
veteran status
or national origin.

C.  This
section does not prohibit discrimination against a person because the person
has been convicted under federal law or the law of any state of the illegal
manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance. END_STATUTE

Sec. 11.  Section 41-1491.15, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-1491.15.  Publication
of sales or rentals

A person may
not make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed or published any
notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a
dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on
race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability, familial status, veteran status or national origin or an
intention to make such a preference, limitation or discrimination. END_STATUTE

Sec. 12.  Section 41-1491.16, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-1491.16.  Inspection
of dwelling

A person may
not represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation,
gender identity, disability,
familial status,
veteran status
or national origin that a dwelling is not available for inspection for sale or
rental if the dwelling is available for inspection. END_STATUTE

Sec. 13.  Section 41-1491.17, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-1491.17.  Entry
into neighborhood

A
person, for profit, may not induce or attempt to induce a person to sell or
rent a dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry
into a neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation,
gender identity, disability,
familial status,
veteran status
or national origin. END_STATUTE

Sec. 14.  Section 41-1491.20, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-1491.20.  Residential
real estate related transaction; definition

A.  A
person whose business includes engaging in residential real estate related
transactions may not discriminate against a person in making a real estate
related transaction available or in the terms or conditions of a real estate
related transaction because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation,
gender identity, disability,
familial status,
veteran status
or national origin.

B.  In For the purposes of this section, "residential
real estate related transaction" means:

1.  Making
or purchasing loans or providing other financial assistance either:

(a)  To
purchase, construct, improve, repair or maintain a dwelling.

(b)  To
secure residential real estate.

2.  Selling,
brokering or appraising residential real property. END_STATUTE

Sec. 15.  Section 41-1491.21, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-1491.21.  Brokerage
services

A person may
not deny any person access to, or membership or participation in, a multiple
listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service,
organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting
dwellings or may not discriminate against a person in the terms or conditions
of access, membership or participation in such an organization, service or
facility because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity, disability,
familial status,
veteran status
or national origin. END_STATUTE

