

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 41-194.01, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE41-194.01.  Violations
of state law by political subdivisions; attorney general investigation; report;
withholding of state shared revenues and other state or county monies;
definition

A.  At
the request of one or more members of the legislature, the attorney general
shall investigate any rule,
ordinance,
regulation, order or other official action adopted or taken by the governing
body of a county,
city or town political
subdivision that
the member alleges violates state law or the Constitution of Arizona.

B.  The
attorney general shall make a written report of findings and conclusions as a
result of the investigation within thirty days after receipt of the request and
shall provide a copy of the report to the governor, the president of the
senate, the speaker of the house of representatives, the member or members of
the legislature making the original request and the secretary of
state.  If the attorney general concludes that the rule, ordinance, regulation, order or
other action under investigation:

1.  Violates
any provision of state law or the Constitution of Arizona, the attorney general
shall provide notice to the county,
city or town political
subdivision,
by certified mail, of the violation and shall indicate that the county, city or town political subdivision has thirty days to resolve the violation.  If
the attorney general determines that the county, city or town political subdivision has failed to resolve the
violation within thirty days, the attorney general shall:

(a)  Notify
the state treasurer or
county treasurer, or both, if appropriate, who shall:

(i)  If the political
subdivision is a county, city or town, withhold and redistribute state shared monies from
the county, city or town as provided by section 42‑5029, subsection L and
from the city or town as provided by section 43‑206, subsection F.

(ii)  If the political
subdivision is not a county, city or town, withhold any state or county monies
that would otherwise be distributed to that political subdivision and retain
those monies in the state general fund or in any other state or county funds or
accounts from which state or county monies would otherwise be distributed to
that political subdivision.

(b)  Continue
to monitor the response of the governing body, and when the offending rule, ordinance, regulation, order or
action is repealed or the violation is otherwise resolved, the attorney general
shall notify:

(i)  The
governor, the president of the senate, the speaker of the house of
representatives and the member or members of the legislature making the
original request that the violation has been resolved.

(ii)  The
state treasurer or
county treasurer, or both, if appropriate, to restore the distribution of
state shared revenues to the county, city or town or to restore the distribution of
other state or county monies to a political subdivision that is not a county,
city or town.

2.  May
violate a provision of state law or the Constitution of Arizona, the attorney
general shall file a special action in the supreme court to resolve the issue,
and the supreme court shall give the
action precedence over all other cases.  The court shall require the a political subdivision that is a county, city or town to post a
bond equal to the amount of state shared revenue paid to the county, city or
town pursuant to section sections 42‑5029 and 43‑206 in
the preceding six months
and require a political subdivision that is not a county, city or town to post
a bond equal to the amount of state and county monies paid to that political
subdivision in the preceding six months.

3.  Does
not violate any provision of state law or the Constitution of Arizona, the
attorney general shall take no further action pursuant to this section.

C.  For
the purposes of this section, "Political subdivision" means any
agency, board, commission or political subdivision of this state that has a
governing body composed of elected members, appointed members or members who
serve on that governing body by virtue of holding a particular office or any
combination of elected members, appointed members or members who serve on that
governing body by virtue of holding a particular office. END_STATUTE

