

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Elder abuse
investigations study committee; duties; annual report; delayed repeal

A.  The
elder abuse investigations study committee is established consisting of the
following members:

1.  Three
members of the house of representatives who are appointed by the speaker of the
house of representatives, not more than two of whom are members of the same
political party.  The speaker of the house of representatives shall
designate one of these members to serve as cochairperson of the committee.

2.  Three
members of the senate who are appointed by the president of the senate, not
more than two of whom are members of the same political party.  The
president of the senate shall designate one of these members to serve as
cochairperson of the committee.

3.  One
member who is a county attorney from a county with a population of at least one
million persons and who is appointed by the speaker of house of representatives.

4.  One
member who is a county attorney from a county with a population of less than
seven hundred thousand persons and who is appointed by the president of the
senate.

5.  One
member who represents a statewide law enforcement association and who is
appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives.

6.  One
member who is a police chief and who is appointed by the president of the
senate.

7.  One
member who represents the courts and who is appointed by the speaker of the
house of representatives.

8.  Two
members who are attorneys specializing in elder law and who are appointed by
the president of the senate.

9.  One
member who represents a statewide association that represents seniors in this
state and who is appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives.

10.  One
member from the governor's office on aging who is appointed by the governor.

11.  The
ombudsman‑citizens aide or the ombudsman's designee.

12.  The
director of the department of economic security or the director's designee.

13.  The
director of the department of health services or the director's designee.

14.  The
attorney general or the attorney general's designee. 

B.  Members
of the committee are not eligible to receive compensation or reimbursement of
expenses.

C.  A
majority of the members of the committee constitutes a quorum.

D.  The
committee shall:

1.  Study
this state's current system of protecting, preventing, investigating and
prosecuting elder abuse cases.

2.  Examine
the existing barriers, services and resources available to address elder abuse.


E.  On
or before December 15, 2017 and each year thereafter, the committee shall
submit a report of its findings and recommendations to the governor, the
president of the senate and the speaker of the house of representatives and
shall provide a copy of this report to the secretary of state.

F.  This
section is repealed from and after December 31, 2020.

