

Be it
enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:

Section 1.  Section 38-843, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE38-843.  Contributions

A.  Each
employer who participates in the system on behalf of a group of employees who
were covered under a prior public retirement system, other than the federal
social security act, shall transfer all securities and monies attributable to
the taxes and contributions of the state other than the state contribution to
social security, the employer and the employees for the covered group of
employees under the other system, such transfer to be made to the fund subject
to all existing liabilities and on or within sixty days following the
employer's effective date.  All monies and securities transferred to the fund
shall be credited to the employer's account in the fund.  A record of the
market value and the cost value of such transferred contributions shall be
maintained for actuarial and investment purposes.

B.  As
determined by actuarial valuations reported to the employer and the local board
by the board of trustees, each employer shall make contributions sufficient
under such actuarial valuations to meet both the normal cost for members hired
before July 1, 2017 plus the actuarially determined amount required to amortize
the unfunded accrued liability on a level percent of compensation basis for all
employees of the employer who are members of the system or participants as
defined in section 38‑865, paragraph 7, subdivision (a), item (i) over, beginning July 1, 2017, a
closed period of not more than twenty years that is established by the board of
trustees taking into account the recommendation of the system's actuary, except
that, beginning with fiscal year 2006‑2007, except as otherwise provided,
the employer contribution rate shall not be less than eight percent of
compensation.  For any employer whose actual contribution rate is less than
eight percent of compensation for fiscal year 2006‑2007, that employer's
contribution rate is not subject to the eight percent minimum but, for fiscal
year 2006‑2007 and each year thereafter, shall be at least five percent
and not more than the employer's actual contribution rate.  An
employer shall have the option of paying a higher level percent of compensation
thereby reducing its unfunded past service liability.  An employer
shall also have the option of increasing its contributions in order to reduce
the contributions required from its members under subsection C of this section,
except that if an employer elects this option the employer shall pay the same
higher level percentage contribution for all members of the eligible
group.  A county employer that elected to pay a higher level
percentage contribution rate may eliminate that higher level percentage
contribution rate amount for members who are hired on or after January 1,
2015.  During a period when an employee is on industrial leave and
the employee elects to continue contributions during the period of industrial
leave, the employer shall make the contributions based on the compensation the
employee would have received in the employee's job classification if the
employee was in normal employment status.  All contributions made by
the employers and all state taxes allocated to the fund shall be irrevocable
and shall be used to pay benefits under the system or to pay expenses of the
system and fund.  The minimum employer contribution that is paid and
that is in excess of the normal cost plus the actuarially determined amount
required to amortize the unfunded accrued liability as calculated pursuant to
this subsection shall be used to reduce future employer contribution increases
and shall not be used to pay for an increase in benefits that are otherwise
payable to members.  The board shall separately account for these
monies in the fund.  Forfeitures arising because of severance of employment
before a member becomes eligible for a pension or any other reason shall be
applied to reduce the cost of the employer, not to increase the benefits
otherwise payable to members.  After the close of any fiscal year, if the
system's actuary determines that the actuarial valuation of an employer's
account contains excess valuation assets other than excess valuation assets
that were in the employer's account as of fiscal year 2004‑2005 and is
more than one hundred percent funded, the board shall account for fifty percent
of the excess valuation assets in a stabilization reserve account. After the
close of any fiscal year, if the system's actuary determines that the actuarial
valuation of an employer's account has a valuation asset deficiency and an
unfunded actuarial accrued liability, the board shall use any valuation assets
in the stabilization reserve account for that employer, to the extent
available, to limit the decline in that employer's funding ratio to not more
than two percent.

C.  Each
member who was hired before July 1, 2017, throughout the member's period of
service from the member's effective date of participation, shall contribute to
the fund an amount equal to the amount prescribed in subsection E of this
section, except as provided in subsection B of this section.  Each
member who was hired on or after July 1, 2017, throughout the member's
period of service from the member's effective date of participation, shall
contribute to the fund an amount equal to the amount prescribed in subsection G
of this section.  During a period when an employee is on industrial
leave and the employee elects to continue contributions during the period of
industrial leave, the employee shall make the employee's contribution based on
the compensation the employee would have received in the employee's job
classification if the employee was in normal employment
status.  Contributions of members shall be required as a condition of
employment and membership in the system and shall be made by payroll
deductions.  Every employee shall be deemed to consent to such
deductions.  Payment of an employee's compensation, less such payroll
deductions, shall constitute a full and complete discharge and satisfaction of
all claims and demands by the employee relating to remuneration for the
employee's services rendered during the period covered by the payment, except
with respect to the benefits provided under the system.  A member may
not, under any circumstance, borrow from, take a loan against or remove
contributions from the member's account before the termination of membership in
the plan or the receipt of a pension.

D.  Each
employer shall transfer to the board the employer and employee contributions
provided for in subsections B, C and G of this section within ten working days
after each payroll date.  Contributions transferred after that date shall
include a penalty of ten percent per annum, compounded annually, for each day
the contributions are late, such penalty to be paid by the
employer.  Delinquent payments due under this subsection, together
with interest charges as provided in this subsection, may be recovered by
action in a court of competent jurisdiction against an employer liable for the
payments or, at the request of the board, may be deducted from any other
monies, including excise revenue taxes, payable to such employer by any
department or agency of this state.

E.  The
amount contributed by a member who was hired before July 1, 2017 pursuant to
subsection C of this section is:

1.  Through
June 30, 2011, 7.65 percent of the member's compensation.

2.  For
fiscal year 2011‑2012, 8.65 percent of the member's compensation.

3.  For
fiscal year 2012‑2013, 9.55 percent of the member's compensation.

4.  For
fiscal year 2013‑2014, 10.35 percent of the member's compensation.

5.  For
fiscal year 2014‑2015, 11.05 percent of the member's compensation.

6.  For
fiscal year 2015‑2016 and each fiscal year thereafter, 11.65 percent of
the member's compensation or 33.3 percent of the sum of the member's
contribution rate from the preceding fiscal year and the aggregate computed
employer contribution rate that is calculated pursuant to subsection B of
this section, whichever is lower, except that the member contribution rate
shall not be less than 7.65 percent of the member's compensation and the
employer contribution rate shall not be less than the rate prescribed in
subsection B of this section.

F.  For
fiscal year 2011‑2012 and each fiscal year thereafter, the amount of the
member's contribution that exceeds 7.65 percent of the member's compensation
shall not be used to reduce the employer's contributions that are calculated
pursuant to subsection B of this section.

G.  For
members hired on or after July 1, 2017, the employer and member contributions
are determined as follows:

1.  As
determined by actuarial valuations reported to the employer and the local board
by the board of trustees, each employer shall make contributions sufficient
under such actuarial valuations to pay fifty percent of both the normal cost
plus the actuarially determined amount required to amortize the total unfunded
accrued liability for each employer attributable only to those members hired on
or after July 1, 2017.  For each year that new unfunded liabilities are
attributable to the employer's own members hired on or after July 1, 2017, a
new amortization base representing the most recent annual gain or loss,
smoothed over a period not more than five years as determined by the board,
shall be created on a level‑dollar basis over a closed period equal to
the average expected remaining service lives of all members but not more than
ten years, as determined by the board.  

2.  The
remaining fifty percent of both the normal cost and actuarially determined
amount required to amortize the total unfunded accrued liability as determined
pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subsection shall be divided by the total number
of the employer's members who were hired on or after July 1, 2017 such that
each member contributes an equal percentage of the member's
compensation.  Member contributions shall begin simultaneously with
membership in the system and shall be made by payroll deduction.

H.  In
any fiscal year, an employer's contribution to the system in combination with
member contributions may not be less than the actuarially determined normal
cost for that fiscal year.  The board may not suspend contributions
to the system unless both of the following apply:

1.  The
retirement system actuary, based on the annual valuation, determines that
continuing to accrue excess earnings could result in disqualification of the
system's tax-exempt status under the provisions of the United States internal
revenue code.

2.  The
board determines that the receipt of any additional contributions required
under this section would conflict with its fiduciary responsibility.

I.  If
a member's employment is terminated with an employer by either party, the total
liability under the system associated with the member's service with the
employer remains with the employer. END_STATUTE

Sec. 2.  Section 38-865, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE38-865.  Definitions

In
this article, unless the context otherwise requires:

1.  "Annuity
account" means an account that is established for each participant to
record the deposit of participant contributions, employer contributions and
interest, dividends or other accumulations credited on behalf of the
participant.

2.  "Board"
means the board of trustees of the public safety personnel retirement system
established by section 38‑848.

3.  "Compensation":

(a)  For participants as
defined in paragraph 7, subdivision (a)
of this section,
has the same meaning prescribed in section 38‑842.

(b)  For participants as
defined in paragraph 7, subdivision (b)
of this section, means salary as defined in section 38‑881.

4.  "Defined
contribution plan" means the public safety personnel defined contribution
retirement plan established pursuant to this article.

5.  "Employer"
has the same meaning prescribed in section 38‑842 or 38‑881, as applicable.

6.  "Employer
contribution" means an amount deposited by an employer, from the
employer's own monies, in the participant's annuity account on a periodic basis
coinciding with the participant's regular pay period. 

7.  "Participant"
means:

(a)   A member as defined in section 38‑842,
paragraph 31, excluding subdivision (a), item (vi), who is one of the
following:

(a) (i)  An employee who is
hired on or after July 1, 2017, who makes the irrevocable election to
participate solely in the defined contribution plan established pursuant to
this article and who was not an active, an inactive or a retired member of the
system or a member of the system with a disability on June 30, 2017. 

(b) (ii)  An employee who is
hired on or after July 1, 2017, who is not covered by the federal old age and
survivors insurance system and who makes the irrevocable election to
participate in the system or is enrolled in the system pursuant to section 38‑842.01,
subsection A.

(b)  A member as defined
in section 38‑881 who is an employee who is hired on or after July 1,
2018 and who was not an active, an inactive or a retired member of the
corrections officer retirement plan or a member of the corrections officer
retirement plan with a disability on June 30, 2018.

8.  "Pensionable
compensation" means the amount of the participant's annual compensation
that does not exceed the limitation specified in section 38‑843.04 or 38‑895.01,
as applicable.

9.  "System"
means the public safety personnel retirement system established by article 4 of
this chapter. END_STATUTE

Sec. 3.  Section 38-867, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE38-867.  Contributions;
member; employer; pickup

A.  Each
participant in the defined contribution plan shall contribute the following
percentage of the participant's gross pensionable compensation by salary
reduction that shall be deposited in the participant's annuity account:

1.  For
a participant as defined in section 38‑865, paragraph 7, subdivision (b) (a), item (ii), three percent.

2.  For
a participant as defined in section 38‑865, paragraph 7, subdivision (a), item (i), nine percent.

3.  For a participant as
defined in section 38‑865, paragraph 7, subdivision (b), five percent.

B.  A
participant as defined in section 38‑865 may make a one‑time
irrevocable election, before the participant is eligible to participate in any
qualified plan of the employer, to contribute more than the percentage of the
participant's gross pensionable compensation specified in this section, up to
the amount allowable under section 415(c) of the internal revenue code, which
shall be the participant's contribution rate for the remainder of the
participant's employment with any employer under the system or the corrections
officer retirement plan, as applicable.

C.  Although
designated as employee contributions, all participant contributions made to the
defined contribution plan shall be picked up and paid by the employer in lieu
of contributions by the employee.  The contributions picked up by an
employer may be made through a reduction in the participant's compensation.  A
participant in the defined contribution plan may not choose to receive the
contributed amounts directly instead of the employer paying the amounts to the
defined contribution plan.  All participant contributions that are
picked up by the employer as provided in this subsection shall be treated as
employer contributions under section 414(h) of the internal revenue code, shall
be excluded from
the
participant's gross income for federal and state income tax purposes and are
includable in the gross income of the participant or the participant's
beneficiaries only in the taxable year in which they are distributed.

D.  Each
employer shall annually make a contribution equal to the following percentages
of each participant's gross pensionable compensation:

1.  For
a participant as
defined in
section 38‑865, paragraph 7, subdivision (b) (a), item (ii), three percent.

2.  For
a participant as
defined in
section 38‑865, paragraph 7, subdivision (a), item (i), nine percent.

3.  For a participant as
defined in section 38‑865, paragraph 7, subdivision (b), five percent.

E.  The
pro rata share of the amount paid in subsection D of this section shall be paid
on each date that a participant contribution is made and shall be credited to
the participant's annuity account.

F.  A
participant of the defined contribution plan may not take loans on any portion
of the accumulated assets in the participant's annuity account.

G.  Each
participant as defined in section 38‑865, paragraph 7, subdivision (a), item (i) and subdivision (b) and each employer shall
contribute to the public safety personnel defined contribution retirement plan
disability program established by article 4.2 of this chapter.

H.  A
participant's contributions and earnings on those contributions are immediately
vested.  A participant is fully vested in the defined contribution plan after
ten years of service, with employer contributions vesting at a rate of ten
percent per year.  END_STATUTE

Sec. 4.  Section 38-870, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE38-870.  Definitions

In this
article, unless the context otherwise requires:

1.  "Assets"
means the accumulated resources of the disability program.

2.  "Board"
means the board of trustees established by section 38‑848.

3.  "Compensation":

(a)  for a participant as
defined in section 38‑865, paragraph 7, subdivision (a), item (i), has the same meaning prescribed in
section 38‑842.

(b)  For a participant as
defined in section 38‑865, paragraph 7, subdivision (b), means salary as defined in
section 38‑881.

4.  "Disability
program" or "program" means the public safety personnel defined
contribution retirement plan disability program established by this article.

5.  "Participant"
means a participant who is in the public safety personnel defined contribution
retirement plan and who is a participant as defined in section 38‑865,
paragraph 7, subdivision (a), item (i) or subdivision (b).

6.  "Pensionable
compensation" has the same meaning prescribed in section 38‑865. END_STATUTE

Sec. 5.  Section 38-870.01, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE38-870.01.  Disability
program; administration; power and duties of the board; hearing

A.  The
public safety personnel defined contribution retirement plan disability program
is established for participants in the public safety personnel defined
contribution retirement plan who either have
elected to participate solely in the defined contribution plan established
pursuant to article 4.1 of this chapter or are participants as defined in
section 38‑865, paragraph 7, subdivision (b).  The board shall
administer the disability program.

B.  The
board may delegate authority to administer the program as it deems necessary
and prudent to the administrator employed pursuant to section 38‑848.

C.  The
board, in the administration, management and operation of the program, shall:

1.  Account
for the operation, administration and investment expenses and allocate them
against investment income.

2.  Contract
on a fee basis with an actuary to make an actuarial valuation of the program
based on the valuation method and valuation assumptions recommended by the
actuary and approved by the board.  The actuary shall be a member of
the American academy of actuaries.

3.  Contract
on a fee basis with an independent auditing firm to make an annual audit of the
accounting records of the fund and file a copy of the audit with the auditor
general.

4.  Invest
the monies in the fund as provided in article 4 of this chapter.

D.  The
board, in the administration, management and operation of the program, may:

1.  Employ
services as it deems necessary.

2.  Either
keep invested monies separate or commingle invested monies as it deems
appropriate.

3.  Do
all acts, whether expressly authorized, that may be deemed necessary or proper
for the protection of the fund.

4.  Determine
the rights, benefits or obligations of any person under this article and afford
any person dissatisfied with a determination of the person's rights, benefits
or obligations under this article with a hearing on the determination. END_STATUTE

Sec. 6.  Section 38-870.06, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE38-870.06.  Disability
program benefit

A.  The
board shall follow the same procedures and method as prescribed in section 38‑844, for a participant who is employed
by an employer as defined in section 38‑842, and section 38‑886.01,
for a participant who is employed by an employer as defined in section 38‑881,
to determine
eligibility for and continuation of a disability benefit and in computing the
amount available to the participant.

B.  A
participant, as defined in section 38‑865,
paragraph 7, subdivision (a), item (i), who meets the requirements for a
disability pension as prescribed in section 38‑844 shall receive a
monthly disability benefit equal to a monthly disability pension that would be
provided to a public safety personnel retirement system member who is hired on
or after July 1, 2017, reduced by an amount equal to the monthly annuitized
value of the participant's annuity account under article 4.1 of this chapter
that does not include a cost‑of‑living adjustment, as determined by
the board.  A
participant, as defined in section 38‑865, paragraph 7, subdivision
(b), who meets the requirements for a
disability pension as prescribed in section 38‑886.01 shall receive a
monthly disability benefit equal to a monthly disability pension that would be
provided to a corrections officer retirement plan member who is hired on or
after July 1, 2012 and before July 1, 2018, reduced by an amount equal to
the monthly annuitized value of the participant's annuity account under article
4.1 of this chapter that does not include a cost‑of‑living adjustment,
as determined by the board.  In
determining the monthly annuitized offset value of the participant's annuity
account under article 4.1 of this chapter to be used in reducing the disability
benefit paid pursuant to this section, the board shall instruct the actuary for
the public safety personnel retirement system to calculate the monthly payment
that would be paid to the participant assuming the participant had elected a
straight life annuity commencing on the participant's date of disability, using
the mortality and interest factors then used by the actuary in determining the
valuation of the public safety personnel retirement system or the corrections
officer retirement plan, as applicable. END_STATUTE

Sec. 7.  Section 38-881, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE38-881.  Definitions

In this
article, unless the context otherwise requires:

1.  "Accidental
disability" means a physical or mental condition that the local board
finds totally and permanently prevents an employee from performing a reasonable
range of duties within the employee's department, was incurred in the
performance of the employee's duties and was the result of any of the
following:

(a)  Physical
contact with inmates, prisoners, parolees or persons on probation.

(b)  Responding
to a confrontational situation with inmates, prisoners, parolees or persons on
probation.

(c)  A
job-related motor vehicle accident while on official business for the
employee's employer.  A job-related motor vehicle accident does not
include an accident that occurs on the way to or from work.  Persons
found guilty of violating a personnel rule, a rule established by the employee's
employer or a state or federal law in connection with a job-related motor
vehicle accident do not meet the conditions for accidental disability.

2.  "Accumulated
member contributions" means for each member the sum of the amount of all
the member's contributions deducted from the member's salary and paid to the
fund, plus member contributions transferred to the fund by another retirement
plan covering public employees of this state, plus previously withdrawn
accumulated member contributions that are repaid to the fund in accordance with
this article, minus any benefits paid to or on behalf of a member.

3.  "Actuarial
equivalent" means equality in present value of the aggregate amounts
expected to be received under two different forms of payment, based on
mortality and interest assumptions adopted by the board.

4.  "Alternate
payee" means the spouse or former spouse of a participant as designated in
a domestic relations order.

5.  "Alternate
payee's portion" means benefits that are payable to an alternate payee
pursuant to a plan approved domestic relations order.

6.  "Annuitant"
means a person who is receiving a benefit pursuant to section 38‑911.

7.  "Average
monthly salary" means, for an employee who becomes a member of the plan
before January 1, 2012, one‑thirty‑sixth of the aggregate amount of
salary that is paid a member by a participating employer during a period of
thirty‑six consecutive months of service in which the member received the
highest salary within the last one hundred twenty months of service and, for an
employee who becomes a member of the plan on or after January 1, 2012 and before July 1,
2018, one‑sixtieth
of the aggregate amount of salary that is paid a member by a participating
employer during a period of sixty consecutive months of service in which the
member received the highest salary within the last one hundred twenty months of
service.  Average monthly salary means the aggregate amount of salary that is
paid a member divided by the member's months of service if the member has less
than thirty‑six or sixty months of service.  In the computation under
this paragraph, a period of nonpaid or partially paid industrial leave shall be
considered based on the salary the employee would have received in the
employee's job classification if the employee was not on industrial leave.

8.  "Beneficiary"
means an individual who is being paid or who has entitlement to the future
payment of a pension on account of a reason other than the individual's
membership in the retirement plan.

9.  "Board"
means the board of trustees of the public safety personnel retirement system.

10.  "Claimant"
means a member, beneficiary or estate that files an application for benefits
with the retirement plan.

11.  "Credited
service" means credited service transferred to the retirement plan from
another retirement system or plan for public employees of this state, plus
those compensated periods of service as a member of the retirement plan for
which member contributions are on deposit in the fund.

12.  "Cure
period" means the ninety-day period in which a participant or alternate
payee may submit an amended domestic relations order and request a
determination, calculated from the time the plan issues a determination finding
that a previously submitted domestic relations order did not qualify as a plan
approved domestic relations order.

13.  "Designated
position" means:

(a)  For
a county:

(i)  A
county detention officer.

(ii)  A
nonuniformed employee of a sheriff's department whose primary duties require
direct contact with inmates.

(b)  For
the state department of corrections and the department of juvenile corrections,
only the following specifically designated positions:

(i)  Food
service.

(ii)  Nursing
personnel.

(iii)  Corrections
physician assistant.

(iv)  Therapist.

(v)  Corrections
dental assistant.

(vi)  Hygienist.

(vii)  Corrections
medical assistant.

(viii)  Correctional
service officer, including assistant deputy warden, deputy warden, warden and
superintendent.

(ix)  State
correctional program officer.

(x)  Parole
or community supervision officers.

(xi)  Investigators.

(xii)  Teachers.

(xiii)  Institutional
maintenance workers.

(xiv)  Youth
corrections officer.

(xv)  Youth
program officer.

(xvi)  Behavioral
health treatment unit managers.

(xvii)  The
director and assistant directors of the department of juvenile corrections and
the superintendent of the state educational system for committed youth.

(xviii)  The
director, deputy directors and assistant directors of the state department of
corrections.

(xix)  Other
positions designated by the local board of the state department of corrections
or the local board of the department of juvenile corrections pursuant to
section 38‑891.

(c)  For
a city or town, a city or town detention officer.

(d)  For
an employer of an eligible group as defined in section 38‑842, full‑time
dispatchers.

(e)  For
the judiciary, probation, surveillance and juvenile detention officers and
those positions designated by the local board of the judiciary pursuant to
section 38‑891.

(f)  For
the department of public safety, state detention officers.

14.  "Determination"
means a written document that indicates to a participant and alternate payee
whether a domestic relations order qualifies as a plan approved domestic
relations order.

15.  "Determination
period" means the ninety-day period in which the plan must review a
domestic relations order that is submitted by a participant or alternate payee
to determine whether the domestic relations order qualifies as a plan approved
domestic relations order, calculated from the time the plan mails a notice of
receipt to the participant and alternate payee.

16.  "Direct
rollover" means a payment by the plan to an eligible retirement plan that
is specified by the distributee.

17.  "Distributee"
means a member, a member's surviving spouse or a member's spouse or former
spouse who is the alternate payee under a plan approved domestic relations
order.

18.  "Domestic
relations order" means an order of a court of this state that is made
pursuant to the domestic relations laws of this state and that creates or
recognizes the existence of an alternate payee's right to, or assigns to an
alternate payee the right to, receive a portion of the benefits payable to a
participant.

19.  "Eligible
child" means an unmarried child of a deceased active or retired member who
meets one of the following qualifications:

(a)  Is
under eighteen years of age.

(b)  Is
at least eighteen years of age and under twenty‑three years of age only
during any period that the child is a full-time student.

(c)  Is
under a disability that began before the child attained twenty‑three
years of age and remains a dependent of the surviving spouse or guardian.

20.  "Eligible
retirement plan" means any of the following that accepts a distributee's
eligible rollover distribution:

(a)  An
individual retirement account described in section 408(a) of the internal
revenue code.

(b)  An
individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of the internal
revenue code.

(c)  An
annuity plan described in section 403(a) of the internal revenue code.

(d)  A
qualified trust described in section 401(a) of the internal revenue code.

(e)  An
annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the internal revenue code.

(f)  An
eligible deferred compensation plan described in section 457(b) of the internal
revenue code that is maintained by a state, a political subdivision of a state
or any agency or instrumentality of a state or a political subdivision of a
state and that agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into the
eligible deferred compensation plan from this plan.

21.  "Eligible
rollover distribution" means a payment to a distributee, but does not
include any of the following:

(a)  Any
distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments
made not less frequently than annually for the life or life expectancy of the
member or the joint lives or joint life expectancies of the member and the
member's beneficiary or for a specified period of ten years or more.

(b)  Any
distribution to the extent the distribution is required under section 401(a)(9)
of the internal revenue code.

(c)  The
portion of any distribution that is not includable in gross income.

(d)  Any
distribution made to satisfy the requirements of section 415 of the internal
revenue code.

(e)  Hardship
distributions.

(f)  Similar
items designated by the commissioner of the United States internal revenue
service in revenue rulings, notices and other guidance published in the
internal revenue bulletin.

22.  "Employee"
means a person employed by a participating employer in a designated position.

23.  "Employer"
means an agency or department of this state or a political subdivision of this
state that has one or more employees in a designated position.

24.  "Fund"
means the corrections officer retirement plan fund.

25.  "Juvenile
detention officer" means a juvenile detention officer responsible for the
direct custodial supervision of juveniles who are detained in a county juvenile
detention center.

26.  "Local
board" means the retirement board of the employer that consists of persons
appointed or elected to administer the plan as it applies to the employer's
members in the plan.

27.  "Member"
means any employee who meets all of the following qualifications:

(a)  Who
is a full‑time paid person employed by a participating employer in a
designated position.

(b)  Who
is receiving salary for personal services rendered to a participating employer
or would be receiving salary except for an authorized leave of absence.

(c)  Whose
customary employment is at least forty hours each week.

28.  "Normal
retirement date" means:

(a)  For
an employee who becomes a member of the plan before January 1, 2012, the first
day of the calendar month immediately following the employee's completion of
twenty years of service or, in the case of a dispatcher, twenty‑five
years of service, the employee's sixty‑second birthday and completion of
ten years of service or the month in which the sum of the employee's age and
years of credited service equals eighty.

(b)  For
an employee who becomes a member of the plan on or after January 1, 2012 and before July 1,
2018, the
first day of the calendar month immediately following the employee's completion
of twenty‑five years of service if the employee is at least fifty‑two
and one‑half years of age or the employee's sixty‑second birthday
and completion of ten years of service.

29.  "Notice
of receipt" means a written document that is issued by the plan to a
participant and alternate payee and that states that the plan has received a
domestic relations order and a request for a determination that the domestic
relations order is a plan approved domestic relations order.

30.  "Ordinary
disability" means a physical condition that the local board determines
will totally and permanently prevent an employee from performing a reasonable
range of duties within the employee's department or a mental condition that the
local board determines will totally and permanently prevent an employee from
engaging in any substantial gainful activity.

31.  "Participant"
means a member who is subject to a domestic relations order.

32.  "Participant's
portion" means benefits that are payable to a participant pursuant to a
plan approved domestic relations order.

33.  "Participating
employer" means an employer that the board has determined to have one or
more employees in a designated position or a county, city, town or department
of this state that has entered into a joinder agreement pursuant to section 38‑902.

34.  "Pension"
means a series of monthly payments by the retirement plan but does not include
an annuity that is payable pursuant to section 38‑911.

35.  "Personal
representative" means the personal representative of a deceased alternate
payee.

36.  "Physician"
means a physician who is licensed pursuant to title 32, chapter 13 or 17.

37.  "Plan
approved domestic relations order" means a domestic relations order that
the plan approves as meeting all the requirements for a plan approved domestic
relations order as otherwise prescribed in this article.

38.  "Plan
year" or "fiscal year" means the period beginning on July 1 of
any year and ending on June 30 of the next succeeding year.

39.  "Probation
or surveillance officer" means an officer appointed pursuant to section 8‑203,
12‑251 or 12‑259 but does not include other personnel, office
assistants or support staff.

40.  "Retired
member" means an individual who terminates employment and who is receiving
a pension pursuant to either section 38‑885 or 38‑886.

41.  "Retirement"
or "retired" means termination of employment after a member has
fulfilled all requirements for a pension or, for an employee who becomes a
member of the plan on or after January 1, 2012 and before July 1, 2018, attains the age and service
requirements for a normal retirement date.

42.  "Retirement
plan" or "plan" means the corrections officer retirement plan
established by this article.

43.  "Salary"
means the base salary, shift differential pay, military differential wage pay
and holiday pay paid a member for personal services rendered in a designated
position to a participating employer on a regular monthly, semimonthly or
biweekly payroll basis.  Salary includes amounts that are subject to
deferred compensation or tax shelter agreements.  Salary does not
include payment for any remuneration or reimbursement other than as prescribed
by this paragraph.  For the purposes of this paragraph, "base
salary" means the amount of compensation each member is regularly paid for
personal services rendered to an employer before the addition of any extra
monies, including overtime pay, shift differential pay, holiday pay, fringe
benefit pay and similar extra payments.

44.  "Segregated
funds" means the amount of benefits that would currently be payable to an
alternate payee pursuant to a domestic relations order under review by the
plan, or a domestic relations order submitted to the plan that failed to
qualify as a plan approved domestic relations order, if the domestic relations
order were determined to be a plan approved domestic relations order.

45.  "Service"
means employment rendered to a participating employer as an employee in a
designated position.  Any absence that is authorized by an employer,
including any periods during which the employee is on an employer sponsored
long‑term disability program, is considered as service if the employee
returns or is deemed by the employer to have returned to a designated position
within the period of the authorized absence.

46.  "Total
and permanent disability" means a physical or mental condition that is not
an accidental disability, that the local board finds totally and permanently
prevents a member from engaging in any gainful employment and that is the
direct and proximate result of the member's performance of the member's duty as
an employee of a participating employer. END_STATUTE

Sec. 8.  Title 38, chapter 5, article 6, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 38-881.01, to read:

START_STATUTE38-881.01.  Employees
hired on or after July 1, 2018; defined contribution plan

An employee who is hired on or after July 1, 2018,
who meets the definition of member as defined in section 38‑881 and who
was not an active, an inactive or a retired member of the plan or a member of
the plan with a disability on June 30, 2018 shall participate in the public
safety personnel defined contribution retirement plan established pursuant to
article 4.1 of this chapter. END_STATUTE

Sec. 9.  Section 38-884, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE38-884.  Membership
of retirement plan; termination; credited service; redemption; reemployment

A.  Each
employee of a participating employer is a member of the plan unless the
employee is receiving a pension from the plan.  A person employed shall undergo
a medical examination performed by a designated physician or a physician
working in a clinic that is appointed by the local board or, in the case of a
state correctional officer who is employed by the state department of
corrections, complete a physical examination pursuant to section 41‑1822,
subsection B.  For the purposes of subsection B of this section, the
designated physician or a physician working in a clinic that is appointed by
the local board may be the employer's regular employee or contractor.

B.  The
purpose of the medical examination authorized by this section is to identify a
member's physical or mental condition or injury that existed or occurred before
the member's date of membership in the plan.  Any employee who fails
or refuses to submit to the medical examination prescribed in this section is
deemed to waive all rights to disability benefits under this article.  Medical
examinations conducted under this article shall be conducted by a physician and
shall not be conducted or used for purposes of hiring, advancement, discharge,
job training or other terms, conditions and privileges of employment unrelated
to receipt or qualification for pension benefits or service credits from the
fund.  This subsection does not affect or impair the right of an
employer to prescribe medical or physical standards for employees or
prospective employees.

C.  If
a member who becomes a member of the plan before January 1, 2012 ceases to be
an employee for any reason other than death or retirement, within twenty days
after filing a completed application with the board, the member is entitled to
receive the following amounts, less any benefit payments the member has
received and any amount the member may owe to the plan:

1.  If
the member has less than five years of credited service with the plan, the
member may withdraw the member's accumulated contributions from the plan.

2.  If
the member has five or more years of credited service with the plan, the member
may withdraw the member's accumulated contributions plus an amount equal to the
amount determined as follows:

(a)  5.0
to 5.9 years of credited service, twenty‑five percent of all member
contributions deducted from the member's salary pursuant to section 38‑891,
subsection B.

(b)  6.0
to 6.9 years of credited service, forty percent of all member contributions
deducted from the member's salary pursuant to section 38‑891, subsection
B.

(c)  7.0
to 7.9 years of credited service, fifty‑five percent of all member
contributions deducted from the member's salary pursuant to section 38‑891,
subsection B.

(d)  8.0
to 8.9 years of credited service, seventy percent of all member contributions
deducted from the member's salary pursuant to section 38‑891, subsection
B.

(e)  9.0
to 9.9 years of credited service, eighty‑five percent of all member
contributions deducted from the member's salary pursuant to section 38‑891,
subsection B.

(f)  10.0
or more years of credited service, one hundred percent of all member
contributions deducted from the member's salary pursuant to section 38‑891,
subsection B.

D.  If
a member who becomes a member of the plan before January 1, 2012 has more than
ten years of credited service with the plan, leaves the monies prescribed in
subsection C of this section on account with the plan for more than thirty days
after termination of employment and after that time period requests a refund of
those monies, the member is entitled to receive the amount prescribed in
subsection C of this section plus interest at a rate determined by the board
for each year computed from and after the member's termination of employment.

E.  The
accumulated member contributions of a member who ceases to be an employee for a
reason other than death or retirement and who becomes a member of the plan on
or after January 1, 2012
and before July 1, 2018
shall be paid to the member plus interest at a rate determined by the board as
of the date of termination within twenty days after filing with the plan a
written application for payment.  

F.  If
the refund includes monies that are an eligible rollover distribution and the
member elects to have the distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement
plan or individual retirement account or annuity and specifies the eligible
retirement plan or individual retirement account or annuity to which the
distribution is to be paid, the distribution shall be made in the form of a
direct trustee‑to‑trustee transfer to the specified eligible
retirement plan.  The distribution shall be made in the form and at
the time prescribed by the board.

G.  For
distributions occurring from and after December 31, 2007, a member or a
member's beneficiary, including a nonspouse designated beneficiary to the
extent permitted under subsection H of this section, may roll over an eligible
rollover distribution as defined in section 402(c)(4) of the internal revenue
code to a Roth individual retirement account, if, for distributions occurring
before January 1, 2010, the member or the member's beneficiary satisfies the
requirements for making a Roth individual retirement account contribution under
section 408A(c)(3)(B) of the internal revenue code, as in effect on the date of
the rollover.  Any amount rolled over to a Roth individual retirement
account is included in the gross income of the member or the member's
beneficiary to the extent the amounts would have been included in gross income
if not rolled over as required under section 408A(d)(3)(A) of the internal revenue
code.  For the purposes of this subsection, the administrator is not
responsible for ensuring the member or the member's beneficiary is eligible to
make a rollover to a Roth individual retirement account.

H.  For
distributions made from and after December 31, 2009, a nonspouse designated
beneficiary as defined in section 401(a)(9)(E) of the internal revenue code may
elect to directly roll over an eligible rollover distribution to an individual
retirement account under section 408(a) of the internal revenue code or an
individual retirement annuity under section 408(b) of the internal revenue code
that is established on behalf of the designated beneficiary and that will be
treated as an inherited individual retirement plan pursuant to section 402(c)(11)
of the internal revenue code.  In order to be able to roll over the
distribution, the distribution otherwise must satisfy the definition of an
eligible rollover distribution as defined in section 402(c)(4) of the internal
revenue code.  In applying this subsection, a nonspouse rollover is not subject
to the direct rollover requirements under section 401(a)(31) of the internal
revenue code, the rollover notice requirements under section 402(f) of the
internal revenue code or the mandatory withholding requirements under section
3405(c) of the internal revenue code.

I.  For
plan years occurring before January 1, 2007, the period for providing the
rollover notice as required under section 402(f) of the internal revenue code
is no less than thirty days and no more than ninety days before the date of
distribution and, for plan years beginning from and after December 31, 2006,
the period for providing the rollover notice as required under section 402(f)
of the internal revenue code is no less than thirty days and no more than one
hundred eighty days before the date of distribution.

J.  Service
shall be credited to a member's individual credited service account in
accordance with rules the local board prescribes.  In no case shall
more than twelve months of credited service be credited on account of all
service rendered by a member in any one year.  In no case shall
service be credited for any period during which the member is not employed in a
designated position, except as provided by sections 38‑921 and 38‑922.

K.  Credited
service is forfeited if the amounts prescribed in subsection C, D or E of this
section are paid or are transferred in accordance with this section.

L.  If
a former member becomes reemployed with the same employer within two years
after the former member's termination date, a member may have forfeited
credited service attributable to service rendered during a prior period of
service as an employee restored on satisfaction of each of the following
conditions:

1.  The
member files with the plan a written application for reinstatement of forfeited
credited service within ninety days after again becoming an employee.

2.  The
retirement fund is paid the total amount previously withdrawn pursuant to
subsection C, D or E of this section plus compound interest from the date of
withdrawal to the dates of repayment.  Interest shall be computed at the rate
of nine percent for each year compounded each year from the date of withdrawal
to the date of repayment.  Forfeited credited service shall not be restored until
complete payment is received by the fund.

3.  The
required payment is completed within one year after returning to employee
status.

M.  If
a member who receives a severance refund on termination of employment pursuant
to subsection C, D or E of this section is subsequently reemployed by an
employer, the member's prior service credits are cancelled, and the board shall
credit service only from the date the member's most recent reemployment period
commenced.  However, a present active member of the plan who received a refund
of accumulated contributions from the plan pursuant to subsection C, D or E of
this section, forfeited credited service pursuant to subsection K of this
section and becomes reemployed with the same employer two years or more after
the member's termination date or becomes reemployed with another employer may
elect to redeem any part of that forfeited credited service by paying into the
plan any amounts required pursuant to this subsection.  A present active member
who elects to redeem any part of forfeited credited service for which the
member is deemed eligible by the board shall pay into the plan the amounts
previously paid or transferred as a refund of the member's accumulated
contributions plus an amount, computed by the plan's actuary that is necessary
to equal the increase in the actuarial present value of projected benefits
resulting from the redemption calculated using the actuarial methods and
assumptions prescribed by the plan's actuary.  On satisfaction of this
obligation, the board shall reinstate the member's prior service credits.

N.  A
retired member may become employed by an employer in a designated position and
continue to receive a pension if the employment occurs at least twelve months
after retirement.  The retired member shall not contribute to the fund and
shall not accrue credited service.  If a retired member becomes employed by an
employer in a designated position before twelve months after retirement:

1.  Payment
of the retired member's pension shall be suspended until the retired member
again ceases to be an employee.  The amount of pension shall not be
changed on account of service as an employee subsequent to retirement.

2.  The
retired member shall not contribute to the fund and shall not accrue credited
service.

O.  Notwithstanding
any other provision of this article, a member who retires having met all of the
qualifications for retirement and who subsequently becomes an elected official,
by election or appointment, is not considered reemployed by the same employer. END_STATUTE

Sec. 10.  Section 38-885, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE38-885.  Normal
retirement; conditions and pension

A.  A
member may retire if the member:

1.  Files
a written application for normal retirement with the plan in the form
prescribed by the plan.

2.  Ceases
to be an employee before the date of retirement.

3.  Meets
one of the age and service requirements for normal retirement prescribed in
subsection B or D
of this section.

B.  A
member who becomes a member of the plan before January 1, 2012 is eligible for
a normal retirement pension if the member satisfies one of the following
requirements:

1.  Is
at least sixty‑two years of age and has ten or more years of service.

2.  Has
twenty or more years of service or, in the case of a dispatcher, twenty‑five
or more years of service.

3.  The
sum of the member's age and years of credited service equals at least eighty.

C.  A
member who meets the requirements for a normal retirement pension pursuant to
subsection B
of this section
and who has twenty years or twenty‑five years, as applicable, of credited
service is entitled to receive a pension that equals fifty per cent percent of the member's average monthly
salary, except that:

1.  If
the member retires with more than twenty years of credited service the
foregoing amount shall be increased by a monthly amount equal to two per cent percent of the member's average monthly
salary multiplied by the number of the member's years of credited service in
excess of twenty years, with pro rata increase for any fractional years, except
that if a member retires with twenty‑five or more years of credited
service the foregoing amount shall be increased by a monthly amount equal to
two and one‑half per
cent
percent of the
member's average monthly salary multiplied by the number of the member's years
of credited service in excess of twenty years, with pro rata increase for any
fractional year.

2.  If
the member retires pursuant to subsection B of this section but has less than twenty years of
credited service, the member is entitled to receive a pension equal to the
product of:

(a)  Two
and one‑half per
cent
percent of the
member's average monthly salary.

(b)  The
member's credited service.

D.  A
person who becomes a member of the plan on or after January 1, 2012 and before July 1,
2018 is
eligible for a normal retirement pension if the person satisfies one of the
following requirements:

1.  Is
at least sixty‑two years of age and has ten or more years of service.

2.  Is
at least fifty‑two and one‑half years of age and has twenty‑five
or more years of service.

E.  A
person who meets the requirements for a normal retirement pension pursuant to
subsection D
of this section
and who has twenty‑five years of credited service is entitled to receive
a pension that equals sixty‑two and one‑half per cent percent of the member's average monthly
salary, except that:

1.  If
the person retires with more than twenty‑five years of credited service
the foregoing amount shall be increased by a monthly amount equal to two and
one‑half per
cent
percent of the
member's average monthly salary multiplied by the number of the member's years
of credited service in excess of twenty‑five years, with pro rata
increase for any fractional year.

2.  If
the person retires pursuant to subsection D of this section but has less than twenty‑five
years of credited service, the person is entitled to receive a pension equal to
the product of:

(a)  Two
and one‑half per
cent
percent of the
member's average monthly salary.

(b)  The
member's credited service. 

F.  In
no case shall the amount of a member's pension exceed eighty per cent percent of the member's average monthly
salary.  Such limitation does not preclude cost‑of‑living
increases granted by the legislature. END_STATUTE

Sec. 11.  Section 38-885.01, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE38-885.01.  Reverse
deferred retirement option plan; purpose

A.  A
reverse deferred retirement option plan is established.  The purpose
of the reverse deferred retirement option plan is to add flexibility to the
plan and to provide members who elect to participate in the reverse deferred
retirement option plan access to a lump sum benefit in addition to their normal
monthly retirement benefit on actual retirement.

B.  The
board shall offer the reverse deferred retirement option plan to members on a
voluntary basis as an alternative method of benefit accrual under the plan.

C.  Any
member who is eligible for a normal pension pursuant to section 38‑885,
who is not awarded an accidental, ordinary or total and permanent disability
pension and who has at least twenty‑four years of credited service, or in
the case of a dispatcher, who has at least twenty‑five years of credited
service, is eligible to participate in the reverse deferred retirement option
plan.

D.  A
member who elects to participate in the reverse deferred retirement option plan
shall voluntarily and irrevocably:

1.  Designate
a reverse deferred retirement option plan date that is the first day of the
calendar month immediately following a member's completion of twenty‑four
years of credited service or a date not more than sixty consecutive months
before the date the member elects to participate in the reverse deferred
retirement option plan, whichever is later.

2.  Agree
to terminate employment on the date the member elects to participate in the
reverse deferred retirement option plan. 

3.  Receive
benefits from the plan on termination of employment at the same time and in the
same manner as otherwise prescribed in this article using the factors of
credited service and average monthly salary in effect on the reverse deferred
retirement option plan date.

E.  On
election, a reverse deferred retirement option plan participation account is
established within the plan on behalf of each reverse deferred retirement
option plan participant.  All benefits accrued pursuant to this article shall
be accounted for in the reverse deferred retirement option plan participation
account.  A reverse deferred retirement option plan participant does
not have a claim on the assets of the plan with respect to the member's reverse
deferred retirement option plan participation account and assets shall not be
set aside for any reverse deferred retirement option plan participant that are
separate from all other system assets.

F.  All
amounts credited to a member's reverse deferred retirement option plan
participation account are fully vested.

G.  A
member's reverse deferred retirement option plan participation account shall be
credited with the following:

1.  An
amount that is credited as though accrued monthly from the reverse deferred
retirement option plan date to the date the member elected to participate in
the reverse deferred retirement option plan and that is computed in the same
manner as a normal retirement benefit using the factors of credited service and
average monthly salary in effect on the reverse deferred retirement option plan
date.

2.  An
amount that is credited as though accrued monthly and that represents interest
at a rate equal to the yield on a five year treasury note as of the first day
of the month as published by the federal reserve board.

H.  Employee
and employer contributions pursuant to section 38‑891 that are deposited
during the period of the reverse deferred retirement option plan are not
eligible to be refunded to the employer or member.

I.  The
participant is not entitled to receive any amount prescribed by section 38‑905 or 38‑906 during the reverse
deferred retirement option plan participation period.

J.  The
form of payment shall be a lump sum distribution.  The member or the
member's beneficiary may make a direct rollover of the lump sum distribution to
an eligible retirement plan under the same rules specified in section 38‑884,
subsections G, H and I.

K.  The
reverse deferred retirement option plan shall not jeopardize in any way the tax
qualified status of the plan under the rules of the internal revenue
service.  The board may adopt additional provisions to the extent
necessary or appropriate for the reverse deferred retirement option plan to
comply with applicable federal laws or rules. END_STATUTE

Sec. 12.  Section 38-886.01, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:

START_STATUTE38-886.01.  Ordinary
disability retirement; qualifications; amount of pension; conditions for
continued payment of pension; definition

A.  A
member may retire and receive an ordinary disability pension if the local board
finds that all of the following conditions occur:

1.  An
application for disability retirement is filed with the retirement plan or the
local board by either the member or the member's participating employer after
the disabling incident or within one year after the date the member ceases to
be an employee and the member's employment is terminated before the member's
normal retirement date by reason of ordinary disability.  Timely
application for an ordinary disability pension is a prerequisite to receipt of
the pension.

2.  The
member undergoes all medical examinations and tests ordered by the local board
and releases to the local board all medical reports and records requested by
the local board.

3.  The
local board determines that an ordinary disability condition exists that meets
the requirements for an ordinary disability.

4.  The
member is not participating in the reverse deferred retirement option plan
pursuant to section 38‑885.01.  

B.  The
effective date of an ordinary disability retirement shall not predate the date
of disability or the date the member ceases to be an employee, and the
disability pension payments shall not violate section 38‑895.02.

C.  Except
for a full‑time dispatcher or a person who becomes a member of the plan
on or after January 1, 2012
and before July 1, 2018,
the amount of an ordinary disability pension is equal to a fraction times the
member's normal retirement pension that is computed pursuant to section 38‑885,
subsection C as if the member had twenty years of credited
service.  The fraction is the result obtained by dividing the
member's actual years of credited service, not to exceed twenty years of
credited service, by twenty.  For a full‑time dispatcher or a
person who becomes a member of the plan on or after January 1, 2012 and before July 1,
2018, the
amount of an ordinary disability pension is equal to a fraction times the
member's normal retirement pension that is computed pursuant to section 38‑885,
subsection C or E as if the member had twenty‑five years of credited
service.  The fraction is the result obtained by dividing the member's actual years
of credited service, not to exceed twenty‑five years of credited service,
by twenty‑five.

D.  The
local board may require a retired member with a disability to undergo periodic
reevaluation of the continuation of ordinary disability.  If the retired member
with a disability refuses to submit to reevaluation, the local board may
suspend payment of the pension.  If the refusal continues for one
year, the local board may revoke the rights to the pension of the retired member's member with a disability rights to the
pension.  An
ordinary disability pension is terminated if the local board finds the retired
member no longer meets the requirements for ordinary disability
retirement.  This subsection does not apply after a retired member
with a disability reaches the member's normal retirement date.  The amount of a
disability pension shall not be recomputed at the normal retirement date of a retired member's member with a disability normal retirement
date.

E.  A
member does not qualify for an ordinary disability pension if the local board
determines that the member's disability results from any of the following:

1.  An
injury suffered while engaged in a felonious criminal act or enterprise.

2.  Service
in the armed forces of the United States that entitles the member to a
veteran's disability pension.

3.  A
physical or mental condition or injury that existed or occurred before the
member's date of membership in the plan.

F.  Local
boards shall base a finding of ordinary disability on medical evidence that is
obtained by a designated physician or a physician working in a clinic selected
by the local board and shall disregard any other medical evidence or opinions. 
If the local board retains more than one physician or clinic in connection with
the application, the local board shall resolve any material conflicts presented
in the medical evidence that is presented by the designated physicians or
clinics.

G.  If
an ordinary disability ceases before a retired member reaches the member's
normal retirement date and the member is reemployed by an employer under the
plan, the pension payable on the member's subsequent retirement shall be
determined as provided in section 38‑885.

H.  For
the purposes of this section, "ordinary disability" means a physical
condition that the local board determines will prevent an employee from totally
and permanently performing a reasonable range of duties within the employee's
department or a mental condition that the local board determines will prevent
an employee from totally and permanently engaging in any substantial gainful
activity. END_STATUTE

Sec. 13.  Section 38-891, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE38-891.  Employer
and member contributions

A.  As
determined by actuarial valuations reported to the employers and the local
boards by the board, each employer shall make level per cent of salary contributions sufficient under
the actuarial valuations to meet both the normal cost for members hired before July 1,
2018 plus the
actuarially determined amount required to amortize the unfunded accrued
liability on
a level percent of salary basis for all employees of the employer who are
members of the plan or participants as defined in section 38‑865,
paragraph 7, subdivision (b) over, beginning July 1, 2005 2018, a rolling closed period of at least not more than twenty and not more than thirty years that is established by the
board taking into account the recommendation of the plan's actuary, except
that, beginning with fiscal year 2006‑2007, except as otherwise provided,
the employer contribution rate shall not be less than six per cent percent of salary.  For any
employer whose actual contribution rate is less than six per cent percent of salary for fiscal year 2006‑2007 and
each year thereafter, that employer's contribution rate shall be at least five per cent percent and not more than the employer's
actual contribution rate.  An employer may pay a higher level per cent percent of salary thereby reducing its
unfunded past service liability.  All contributions made by the
employers and all state taxes allocated to the fund shall be irrevocable and
shall be used to pay benefits under the plan or to pay expenses of the plan and
fund.  The minimum employer contribution that is paid and that is in
excess of the normal cost plus the actuarially determined amount required to
amortize the unfunded accrued liability as calculated pursuant to this
subsection shall be used to reduce future employer contribution increases and
shall not be used to pay for an increase in benefits that are otherwise payable
to members.  The board shall separately account for these monies in
the fund.  Forfeitures arising because of severance of employment
before a member becomes eligible for a pension or for any other reason shall be
applied to reduce the cost to the employer, not to increase the benefits
otherwise payable to members.  After the close of any fiscal year, if the
plan's actuary determines that the actuarial valuation of an employer's account
contains excess valuation assets other than excess valuation assets that were
in the employer's account as of fiscal year 2004‑2005 and is more than
one hundred per
cent
percent
funded, the board shall account for fifty per cent percent of the excess valuation assets in
a stabilization reserve account.  After the close of any fiscal year, if the
plan's actuary determines that the actuarial valuation of an employer's account
has a valuation asset deficiency and an unfunded actuarial accrued liability,
the board shall use any valuation assets in the stabilization reserve account
for that employer, to the extent available, to limit the decline in that
employer's funding ratio to not more than two per cent percent.

B.  Each
member shall contribute the amount prescribed in subsection H of this section
to the retirement plan.  Member contributions shall be made by
payroll deduction.  Continuation of employment by the member
constitutes consent and agreement to the deduction of the applicable member
contribution. Payment of the member's salary less the deducted contributions
constitutes full and complete discharge and satisfaction of all claims and
demands of the member relating to salary for services rendered during the
period covered by the payment.  A member may not, under any
circumstance, borrow from, take a loan against or remove contributions from the
member's account before the termination of membership in the plan or the
receipt of a pension.

C.  Each
employer shall transfer to the board the employer and employee contributions
provided for in this section within ten working days after each payroll date. 
Contributions transferred after that date shall include a penalty of ten per cent percent per annum, compounded annually,
for each day the contributions are late.  The employer shall pay this
penalty.  Delinquent payments due under this subsection, together
with interest charges as provided in this subsection, may be recovered by
action in a court of competent jurisdiction against an employer liable for the
payments or, at the request of the board, may be deducted from any other
monies, including excise revenue taxes, payable to the employer by any
department or agency of this state.

D.  During
a period when an employee is on industrial leave and the employee elects to
continue contributions during the period of industrial leave, the employer and
employee shall make contributions based on the salary the employee would have
received in the employee's job classification if the employee was in normal
employment status.

E.  The
local board of the state department of corrections or the local board of the
department of juvenile corrections may specify a position within that
department as a designated position if the position is filled by an employee
who has at least five years of credited service under the plan, who is
transferred to temporarily fill the position and who makes a written request to
the local board to specify the position as a designated position within ninety
days of after being transferred.  On
the employee leaving the position, the position is no longer a designated
position.

F.  The
local board of the state department of corrections, the local board of the
department of juvenile corrections or the local board of a county, city or town
that operates detention facilities may specify a designated position within the
department or facility as a nondesignated position if the position is filled by
an employee who has at least five years of credited service under the Arizona
state retirement system and who makes a written request to the local board to
specify the position as a nondesignated position within ninety days of after accepting the position.  On the
employee leaving the position, the position reverts to a designated position.

G.  The
local board of the judiciary may specify positions within the administrative
office of the courts that require direct contact with and primarily provide
training or technical expertise to county probation, surveillance or juvenile
detention officers as a designated position if the position is filled by an
employee who is a member of the plan currently employed in a designated
position as a probation, surveillance or juvenile detention officer and who has
at least five years of credited service under the plan.  An employee who fills
such a position shall make a written request to the local board to specify the
position as a designated position within ninety days of after accepting the position.  On the
employee leaving the position, the position reverts to a nondesignated
position.

H.  The
amount contributed by a member pursuant to subsection B of this section is:

1.  Through
June 30, 2011, 8.41 per
cent
percent of the
member's salary, except for a full‑time dispatcher.  The amount
contributed by a full‑time dispatcher through June 30, 2011 is 7.96 per cent percent of the member's salary.

2.  For
fiscal year 2011‑2012 and each fiscal year thereafter, 8.41 per cent percent of the member's salary or fifty per cent percent of the sum of the member's
contribution rate from the preceding fiscal year and the aggregate computed
employer contribution rate that is calculated pursuant to subsection A of this
section, whichever is lower, except that the member contribution rate shall not
be less than 7.65 per
cent
percent of the
member's salary and the employer contribution rate shall not be less than the
rate prescribed in subsection A of this section.

I.  Notwithstanding
subsection H, paragraph 2 of this section, the contribution rate for a full‑time
dispatcher is forty‑five basis points less than the member contribution
amount calculated pursuant to subsection H, paragraph 2 of this section, except
that after the close of any fiscal year, if the plan's actuary determines that
the aggregate ratio of the funding value of the accrued assets to the accrued
liabilities of the fund is at least one hundred per cent percent, from and after June 30 of the
following year the member contribution rate for a full‑time dispatcher is
equal to the member contribution rate for a member who is not a full‑time
dispatcher.

J.  For
fiscal year 2011‑2012 and each fiscal year thereafter, the amount of the
member's contribution that exceeds 8.41 per cent percent of the member's salary for a
member other than a full‑time dispatcher or 7.96 per cent percent of the member's salary for a full‑time
dispatcher shall not be used to reduce the employer's contributions that are
calculated pursuant to subsection A of this section. END_STATUTE

Sec. 14.  Repeal

Sections 38-905, 38-905.01,
38-905.02, 38-905.03 and
38-905.04, Arizona Revised Statutes, are repealed.

Sec. 15.  Title 38, chapter 5, article 6, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 38-905.05, to read:

START_STATUTE38-905.05.  Cost-of-living
adjustment; members hired on or before June 30, 2018

A.  For
members hired on or before June 30, 2018, each retired member or survivor of a
retired member is eligible to receive a compounding cost‑of‑living
adjustment in the base benefit as provided in this section.  The
first payment under this section shall be made immediately following the first
year the cost-of-living adjustment specified in subsection C of this section is
paid.  The cost‑of‑living adjustment shall be made on July 1 each
year thereafter.

B.  A retired member or a survivor of a
retired member shall receive annually a cost-of-living adjustment in the base
benefit based on the average annual percentage change in the metropolitan
Phoenix‑Mesa consumer price index published by the United States
department of labor, bureau of labor statistics, with the immediately preceding
year as the base year for making the determination, not to exceed annually two
percent of the retired member's or survivor's base benefit.

C.  In the first year of a member's
retirement, the cost-of-living adjustment specified in subsection B of this
section shall be prorated based on the date of retirement.

D.  The plan's actuary shall include the
projected cost of providing the cost‑of‑living adjustment specified
in subsection B of this section in the calculation of normal cost and accrued
liability. END_STATUTE

Sec. 16.  Section 38-911, Arizona Revised Statutes,
is amended to read:

START_STATUTE38-911.  Deferred
annuity; eligibility; amount; exception

A.  If
any member who has at least ten years of credited service terminates employment
for reasons other than retirement or disability, the person may elect to
receive a deferred annuity, except that if the person withdraws the person's
accumulated contributions from the plan, all rights to a deferred annuity are
forfeited.  A deferred annuity is a lifetime monthly payment that is
actuarially equivalent to the annuitant's accumulated contributions in the plan
plus an equal amount paid by the employer and commences on application on or
after the sixty‑second birthday of the annuitant.  The deferred
annuity is not a retirement benefit and annuitants are not entitled to receive
any amount prescribed by section 38‑887, 38‑888, 38‑904, 38‑905, 38‑905.02 or 38‑906. 

B.  This
section does not apply to a member who becomes a member of the plan on or after
January 1, 2012
and before July 1, 2018.  Such
a person who attains a normal retirement date is eligible for retirement and a
retirement benefit even if the member terminates employment with an employer
before the age requirement for normal retirement if the member attains the
service requirement for normal retirement. END_STATUTE

Sec. 17.  Conditional enactment

Section 38‑885.01,
Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended by this act, sections 38‑905,
38-905.01, 38-905.02, 38-905.03 and 38‑905.04, Arizona Revised Statutes,
as repealed by this act, section 38‑905.05, Arizona Revised Statutes, as
added by this act and section 38‑911, Arizona Revised Statutes, as
amended by this act, do not become effective unless the Constitution of Arizona
is amended as prescribed in Senate concurrent resolution ____, fifty‑third
legislature, first regular session, by vote of the people at the next general
election.

