State of Arkansas                                                                        Call Item 4
91st General Assembly                        A Bill
First Extraordinary Session, 2017                                                    SENATE BILL 3
By: Senator J. Dismang
By: Representative Gillam
For An Act To Be Entitled
AN ACT TO AMEND THE ARKANSAS WORKS ACT OF 2016 TO
REDUCE INCOME ELIGIBILITY LIMITS IN THE ARKANSAS
WORKS PROGRAM TO ONE HUNDRED PERCENT (100%) OF THE
FEDERAL POVERTY LEVEL AND IMPOSE WORK REQUIREMENTS ON
CERTAIN INDIVIDUALS ENROLLED IN THE ARKANSAS WORKS
PROGRAM; TO ALLOW ARKANSAS THE FLEXIBILITY TO SELECT
WHETHER TO BECOME AN "ASSESSMENT STATE" OR A
"DETERMINATION STATE"; TO DECLARE AN EMERGENCY; AND
FOR OTHER PURPOSES.
Subtitle
TO AMEND ARKANSAS WORKS TO REDUCE INCOME
ELIGIBILITY LIMITS AND IMPOSE WORK
REQUIREMENTS; TO ALLOW THE FLEXIBILITY TO
SELECT WHETHER TO BECOME AN "ASSESSMENT
STATE" OR A "DETERMINATION STATE"; AND TO
DECLARE AN EMERGENCY.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF ARKANSAS:
SECTION 1.        DO NOT CODIFY.      Legislative findings and intent.
(a)    The General Assembly finds that:
(1)    The State of Arkansas continues to seek strategies to
provide health insurance for low-income and other vulnerable populations in a
manner that will encourage personal responsibility and enhance program
integrity;
(2)   Arkansas recognizes the continued need to promote employment
among beneficiaries of public assistance programs by providing those
beneficiaries with the tools to achieve economic advancement;
(3)   Arkansas continues to support the flexibility within § 23-
61-1004(h) that authorizes the Governor to "request a block grant under
relevant federal law and regulations for the funding of the Arkansas Medicaid
Program as soon as practical if the federal law or regulations change to
allow the approval of a block grant for this purpose";
(4)   On March 6, 2017, Governor Asa Hutchinson announced
additional reforms to the Arkansas Works Program to further support
efficiency and sustainability of the health insurance coverage provided under
the Arkansas Works Program by:
(A)   Establishing a work requirement for certain
beneficiaries of the Arkansas Works Program to encourage beneficiaries to
work and to support beneficiaries in the process of returning to the
workforce;
(B)   Capping eligibility for the Arkansas Works Program at
one hundred percent (100%) of the federal poverty level; and
(C)   Returning control of the eligibility process to the
state by allowing the state the flexibility to determine whether the state
would be an "assessment state" or a "determination state"; and
(5)(A)     To avoid variations in enrollment within a Medicaid
program based on an eligibility determination of a federally facilitated
marketplace, Arkansas needs the flexibility to select whether to become an
"assessment state" or a "determination state" in order to strengthen the
integrity of the Medicaid Eligibility Verification System.
(B)   However, the Medicaid Eligibility Verification System
established by Acts 2013, No. 1265, requires that the eligibility
determination made by the federally facilitated marketplace be accepted by
the Department of Human Services, which makes Arkansas a "determination
state" for the purposes of eligibility determination by a federally
facilitated marketplace.
(b)     It is the intent of the General Assembly to:
(1)   Implement reforms to the Arkansas Works Program to further
support efficiency and sustainability of the health insurance provided under
the Arkansas Works Program; and
05-01-2017 08:58:51 JMB527
(2)    Repeal §§ 20-77-2101 and 20-77-2103 to allow Arkansas the
flexibility to select whether to become an "assessment state" or a
"determination state" in order to strengthen the integrity of the Medicaid
Eligibility Verification System.
SECTION 2.    DO NOT CODIFY.   TEMPORARY LANGUAGE.   Arkansas Works Program
modifications.
(a)   The Department of Human Services shall submit a state plan
amendment or waiver, or both, to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services that establishes:
(1)    Income eligibility at an amount equal to or less than one
hundred percent (100%) of the federal poverty level, inclusive of the income
disregard under 42 C.F.R. § 435.603(d)(4), as it existed on January 1, 2017;
and
(2)    A work requirement for eligible individuals with exemptions
for certain activities and conditions.
(b)   The income eligibility standard and the work requirement under
subsection (a) of this section shall be effective on and after:
(1)    January 1, 2018; or
(2)    The date of occurrence of the later of the following if one
(1) or both actions have not occurred by January 1, 2018:
(A)   Approval of the state plan amendment or waiver, or
both, under subsection (a) of this section from the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services; and
(B)   The approval and adoption of rules under § 10-3-309
and the Arkansas Administrative Procedure Act, § 25-15-201 et seq., that are
necessary to implement the income eligibility standards and work requirements
under this section.
SECTION 3.    DO NOT CODIFY.   TEMPORARY LANGUAGE.   Small employer health
insurance coverage study.
(a)   The Department of Human Services, in coordination with the State
Insurance Department and the Department of Workforce Services, shall study
and analyze small employer health insurance coverage in this state to
determine how to strengthen employer-sponsored insurance and help small-
business employers offer more affordable health insurance coverage for
05-01-2017 08:58:51 JMB527
employees.
(b)(1)      On or before October 1, 2018, the Department of Human Services,
in coordination with the State Insurance Department and the Department of
Workforce Services, shall report on the findings of the study required under
subsection (a) of this section to the Legislative Council and the Governor.
(2)    The report shall include without limitation:
(A)   Recommendations for legislation to address the need of
small-business employers in relation to health insurance coverage for their
employees; and
(B)   Options for new programs to strengthen employer-
sponsored insurance and help small-business employers offer more affordable
health insurance coverage for employees.
SECTION 4.       Arkansas Code § 23-61-1003(10), concerning the definition
of "program participant" within the Arkansas Works Act of 2016, is amended to
read as follows:
(10)   “Program participant” means an eligible individual who:
(A)   Is at least nineteen (19) years of age and no more
than sixty-four (64) years of age with an income that is equal to or less
than one hundred thirty-eight percent (138%) of the federal poverty level
meets the income eligibility standards established by rule of the Department
of Human Services;
(B)   Is authenticated to be a United States citizen or
documented qualified alien according to the Personal Responsibility and Work
Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-193;
(C)   Is not eligible for Medicare or advanced premium tax
credits through the health insurance marketplace; and
(D)   Is not determined to be more effectively covered
through the traditional Arkansas Medicaid Program, including without
limitation:
(i)    An individual who is medically frail; or
(ii)   An individual who has exceptional medical needs
for whom coverage offered through the health insurance marketplace is
determined to be impractical, overly complex, or would undermine continuity
or effectiveness of care; and
05-01-2017 08:58:51 JMB527
SECTION 5.      Effective December 31, 2017, Arkansas Code § 23-61-1004(b),
concerning the administration of the Arkansas Works Program, is amended to
read as follows:
(b)   Health insurance benefits under this subchapter shall be provided
through:
(1)   Individual premium assistance for enrollment of Arkansas
Works Program participants in individual qualified health insurance plans;
and
(2)   Employer-sponsored premium assistance for certain eligible
individuals who enroll in employer health insurance coverage; and
(3)   Supplemental benefits to incentivize personal
responsibility.
SECTION 6.      Arkansas Code § 23-61-1008, concerning insurance standards
for employer health insurance coverage, is amended to add an additional
subsection to read as follows:
(g)(1)     This section shall expire on December 31, 2017.
(2)   The Arkansas Code Revision Commission shall remove this
section from the Arkansas Code after December 31, 2017.
SECTION 7.      Arkansas Code § 20-77-2101 is repealed.
20-77-2101. Definitions.
As used in this subchapter:
(1)   “Arkansas Data Services Hub” means the Arkansas data
services hub that provides an electronic method to verify:
(A)   Age, residency, and child support information via the
Department of Finance and Administration;
(B)   Age, marriage, and death information via the Division
of Vital Records of the Department of Health;
(C)   Age, Social Security number, citizenship, and Medicare
coverage information via the state online portal to the Social Security
Administration;
(D)   Employment earnings and unemployment benefit payment
information via the Department of Workforce Services; and
(E)   Receipt of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
benefits;
05-01-2017 08:58:51 JMB527
(2)    “Federal Data Services Hub” means the federal data services
hub that provides an electronic method to verify:
(A)   Social Security number verification via the Social
Security Administration;
(B)   Citizenship verification via the Social Security
Administration;
(C)   Incarceration verification via the Social Security
Administration;
(D)   Verification of income under Title II of the Social
Security Act, 42 U.S.C. § 401 et seq., via the Social Security
Administration;
(E)   Quarters of coverage information via the Social
Security Administration;
(F)   Modified adjusted gross income information via the
Internal Revenue Service;
(G)   Immigration status verification via the United States
Department of Homeland Security;
(H)   Indicators for lawful presence, qualified noncitizen,
and five-year bar status via the United States Department of Homeland
Security; and
(I)   Public minimum essential coverage;
(3)(A)     “Medicaid eligible” means an individual who is eligible
for Medicaid benefits.
(B)   “Medicaid eligible” does not include establishment of
an entitlement to a particular benefit package or the reimbursement of
particular medical assistance; and
(4)    “Supplemental manual verification investigation” means an
investigation conducted by the Department of Human Services or its designee
to gather information by methods such as contacting family members,
employers, and medical facilities to verify information received via the
Medicaid Eligibility Verification System.
SECTION 8.     Arkansas Code § 20-77-2102 is amended to read as follows:
20-77-2102. Medicaid Eligibility Verification System — Definitions.
(a)   The Department of Human Services shall establish and maintain the
Medicaid Eligibility Verification System that is designed to prevent fraud in
05-01-2017 08:58:51 JMB527
the establishment and maintenance of Medicaid eligibility.
(b)(1)     In establishing the Medicaid Eligibility Verification System,
the department shall have the flexibility to determine whether the state
shall be an "assessment state" or a "determination state" for purposes of
Medicaid eligibility determinations by the federally facilitated marketplace.
(2)   As used in this subsection:
(A)   "Assessment state" means a state with a federally
facilitated marketplace that can elect to have the federally facilitated
marketplace make assessments of Medicaid eligibility and then transfer the
account of an individual to the state Medicaid agency for a final
determination; and
(B)   "Determination state" means a state that requires the
eligibility determination made by the federally facilitated marketplace to be
accepted by the state Medicaid agency.
SECTION 9.      Arkansas Code § 20-77-2103 is repealed.
20-77-2103.      Medicaid Eligibility Verification System — Requirements.
(a)   Beginning concurrently with the establishment of live, full-time
operation of the Federal Data Services Hub and the Arkansas Data Services
Hub, the Department of Human Services shall deploy an automated eligibility
verification system that electronically queries the Federal Data Services Hub
and the Arkansas Data Services Hub under this subchapter.
(b)   The department shall electronically query the Federal Data
Services Hub upon receiving a Medicaid application and to the extent
permitted by the Federal Data Services Hub for purposes of Medicaid
eligibility renewal.
(c)   If the Medicaid eligibility or continued Medicaid eligibility of
an individual can be determined based on information received via the Federal
Data Services Hub, the department shall determine eligibility and notify the
applicant or recipient.
(d)   If the Medicaid eligibility or continued eligibility of an
individual cannot be determined based on information received via the Federal
Data Services Hub, the department shall electronically query the Arkansas
Data Services Hub and determine whether the information received from each
data services hub is:
(1)   Reasonably compatible and establishes that the individual is
05-01-2017 08:58:51 JMB527
Medicaid-eligible;
(2)   Reasonably compatible and establishes that the individual is
not Medicaid-eligible; or
(3)   Not reasonably compatible.
(e)   If the information received from the Federal Data Services Hub and
the Arkansas Data Services Hub is reasonably compatible, the department shall
enter an eligibility determination and inform the applicant or recipient of
the decision.
(f)(1)     If the information received from the Federal Data Services Hub
and Arkansas Data Services Hub is not reasonably compatible, the department
shall conduct a supplemental manual verification investigation.
(2)   At the conclusion of the supplemental manual verification
investigation, the department shall enter an eligibility determination and
inform the applicant or recipient of the decision.
(g)   The department may adopt rules to implement this subchapter.
SECTION 10.      EFFECTIVE DATE.
Section 5 of this act is effective on and after December 31, 2017.
SECTION 11.      EMERGENCY CLAUSE.     It is found and determined by the
General Assembly of the State of Arkansas that this act requires that the
Department of Human Services submit a state plan amendment or waiver, or
both, to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services; that the state plan
amendment or waiver, or both, impacts certain individuals who are presently
enrolled in the Arkansas Works Program; and that this act is immediately
necessary because the Department of Human Services needs to be able to make
the state plan amendment request or waiver request, or both, at the earliest
possible date to ensure certainty in the requirements of the Arkansas Works
Program. Therefore, an emergency is declared to exist, and this act being
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health, and
safety shall become effective on:
(1)   The date of its approval by the Governor;
(2)   If the bill is neither approved nor vetoed by the Governor,
the expiration of the period of time during which the Governor may veto the
bill; or
(3)   If the bill is vetoed by the Governor and the veto is
05-01-2017 08:58:51 JMB527
overridden, the date the last house overrides the veto.
05-01-2017 08:58:51 JMB527