State of Arkansas                                                                        Call Item 6
91st General Assembly                        A Bill
First Extraordinary Session, 2017                                                 HOUSE BILL 1005
By: Representative Gillam
By: Senators J. Hendren, J. Dismang
For An Act To Be Entitled
AN ACT TO AMEND INITIATED ACT 1 OF 2000, ALSO KNOWN
AS THE "TOBACCO SETTLEMENT PROCEEDS ACT"; TO
AUTHORIZE THE TRANSFER OF FUNDS FROM THE ARKANSAS
HEALTHY CENTURY TRUST FUND; TO TRANSFER FUNDS FROM
THE ARKANSAS HEALTHY CENTURY TRUST FUND TO THE LONG
TERM RESERVE FUND; TO DECLARE AN EMERGENCY; AND FOR
OTHER PURPOSES.
Subtitle
TO AMEND INITIATED ACT 1 OF 2000; TO
AUTHORIZE THE TRANSFER OF FUNDS FROM THE
ARKANSAS HEALTHY CENTURY TRUST FUND TO
THE LONG TERM RESERVE FUND; AND TO
DECLARE AN EMERGENCY.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF ARKANSAS:
SECTION 1.       DO NOT CODIFY.       Legislative findings.
The General Assembly finds that:
(1)    The level of state financial reserves affects the state’s
credit rating, as a higher level of reserves will result in a better credit
rating;
(2)    Arkansas scores low on financial reserves analyses, with the
lack of adequate reserves negatively affecting the state’s credit rating;
(3)    S&P Global Ratings gives the highest possible score,
consistent with a AAA-rating, for states in which “[t]here is a formal
budget-based reserve relative to revenue or spending that is above 8%”;
(4)    S&P affirmed its ‘AA' long-term rating to Arkansas's series
2016 taxable refunding higher education general obligation bonds and noted,
“The state lacks a formal reserve and liquidity policy . . .”       but also noted
that the State of Arkansas has formed a funding strategy for the state's Long
Term Reserve Fund;
(5)    A funded reserve fund and a higher credit rating will save
the state money;
(6)    Arkansas currently has approximately one billion five
hundred million dollars ($1,500,000,000) in outstanding general obligation
debt;
(7)    An improvement in the state’s credit rating from AA to AAA
would allow the state to borrow money at twelve (12) to fifteen (15) basis
points below the current AA-rate, potentially saving the state one million
eight hundred thousand dollars ($1,800,000) per year in interest costs; and
(8)    In addition to financial benefits from a higher credit
rating, there are numerous qualitative benefits, including the increased
appeal of a higher credit rating to potential new industries, which will
assist the state in pursuing the important goal of recruiting industry to our
state.
SECTION 2.    Arkansas Code § 19-6-486(g), concerning the Long Term
Reserve Fund, is amended to read as follows:
(g)   During each fiscal year, after the provisions of § 19-5-1004(b)(2)
are complied with, the Chief Fiscal Officer of the State may replenish the
Long Term Reserve Fund by transferring no more than fifty percent (50%) of
the balance in the General Revenue Allotment Reserve Fund or an amount equal
to all transfers made under this section during the fiscal year immediately
preceding the fiscal year in which such replenishment is made under this
section, whichever is less, to the Long Term Reserve Fund. In no event shall
the balance of the Long Term Reserve Fund exceed one hundred twenty-five
million dollars ($125,000,000) at any time.
SECTION 3.    Arkansas Code § 19-12-107(e), concerning the Arkansas
Healthy Century Trust Fund and derived from Initiated Act 1 of 2000, is
amended to read as follows:
05-01-2017 09:52:25 JLL382
(e)   The Arkansas Healthy Century Trust Fund shall be held in trust and
used for the following purposes, and no other purposes:
(1)   investment earnings on the Arkansas Healthy Century Trust
Fund may be used for:
(A)   the payment of expenses related to the
responsibilities of the State Board of Finance as set forth in § 19-12-103;
and
(B)   such programs, and other projects related to health
care services, health education, and health-related research as shall, from
time to time, be designated in legislation adopted by the General Assembly.;
(2)   the principal amounts in the Arkansas Healthy Century Trust
Fund may only be used for such programs, and other projects related to health
care services, health education, and health-related research as shall, from
time to time, be designated in legislation adopted by the General Assembly,
it being the intent of this chapter that the principal amount of the Arkansas
Healthy Century Trust Fund should not be appropriated without amendment of
this public trust; and
(3)   notwithstanding subdivisions (e)(1) and (e)(2) of this
section, investment earnings and principal amounts from the Arkansas Healthy
Century Trust Fund may be transferred as designated in legislation adopted by
the General Assembly.
SECTION 4.     DO NOT CODIFY.   Transfer from the Arkansas Healthy Century
Trust Fund.
Immediately upon the effective date of this act or as soon as is
practicable after the effective date of this act, the Chief Fiscal Officer of
the State shall transfer on his or her books and the books of the Treasurer
of State and the Auditor of State the balance of the Arkansas Healthy Century
Trust Fund to the Long Term Reserve Fund.
SECTION 5.     EMERGENCY CLAUSE.       It is found and determined by the
General Assembly of the State of Arkansas that the State of Arkansas does not
have a dedicated source of budget reserves; that providing funding for the
Long Term Reserve Fund could improve the credit rating of the State of
Arkansas and increase the fiscal strength and stability of the state; and
that this act is immediately necessary because the transfer of the balance of
05-01-2017 09:52:25 JLL382
the Arkansas Healthy Century Trust Fund to other state purposes would improve
the state's credit rating and save the state a significant amount of money
that could then be used for other important state purposes. Therefore, an
emergency is declared to exist, and this act being immediately necessary for
the preservation of the public peace, health, and safety shall become
effective on:
(1)   The date of its approval by the Governor;
(2)   If the bill is neither approved nor vetoed by the Governor,
the expiration of the period of time during which the Governor may veto the
bill; or
(3)   If the bill is vetoed by the Governor and the veto is
overridden, the date the last house overrides the veto.
05-01-2017 09:52:25 JLL382