State of Arkansas                                                                        Call Item 5
91st General Assembly                        A Bill
First Extraordinary Session, 2017                                                 HOUSE BILL 1004
By: Representative Gillam
By: Senator J. Dismang
For An Act To Be Entitled
AN ACT CONCERNING THE ARKANSAS HEALTH INSURANCE
MARKETPLACE; TO PROHIBIT DEVELOPMENT OF TECHNOLOGY
FOR A STATE-BASED PLATFORM FOR THE INDIVIDUAL HEALTH
INSURANCE MARKETPLACE; TO PROVIDE OVERSIGHT OF THE
ARKANSAS HEALTH INSURANCE MARKETPLACE TO THE
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL; TO STUDY THE FUTURE DIRECTION OF
THE ARKANSAS HEALTH INSURANCE MARKETPLACE; TO DECLARE
AN EMERGENCY; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.
Subtitle
CONCERNING THE ARKANSAS HEALTH INSURANCE
MARKETPLACE; TO STUDY THE FUTURE
DIRECTION OF THE ARKANSAS HEALTH
INSURANCE MARKETPLACE; AND TO DECLARE AN
EMERGENCY.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF ARKANSAS:
SECTION 1.        DO NOT CODIFY.      Legislative findings and intent.
(a)    The General Assembly finds that:
(1)    Since the enactment of Acts 2013, No. 1500, several changes
regarding the health insurance marketplaces have occurred on a federal level
that have modified the operation of the health insurance marketplaces;
(2)    The federal government is expected to propose additional
changes regarding the health insurance marketplaces in the next year; and
(3)    Due to the ongoing changes at the federal level regarding
health insurance, prohibiting development of technology for a state-based
platform for the individual health insurance marketplace and reviewing the
direction of the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace would be beneficial to
the State of Arkansas for the future efficiency, sustainability, and
transparency of the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace.
(b)   It is the intent of the General Assembly through this act to:
(1)     Prohibit development of technology for a state-based
platform for the individual health insurance marketplace;
(2)     Impose certain reporting requirements on the Arkansas Health
Insurance Marketplace to ensure that the Governor and the General Assembly
are better informed about the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace; and
(3)     Transfer oversight of the Arkansas Health Insurance
Marketplace from the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace Legislative
Oversight Committee to the Legislative Council.
SECTION 2.     DO NOT CODIFY.   TEMPORARY LANGUAGE.   Study regarding future
direction for Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace.
(a)   The Legislative Council shall:
(1)     Review the operations, programs, and finances of the
Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace;
(2)     Study approaches by other states regarding health insurance
marketplace structure, design, and operations;
(3)     Provide recommendations concerning the Arkansas Health
Insurance Marketplace for the continued availability of health insurance to
Arkansans; and
(4)     Explore and recommend options for the future efficiency and
sustainability of the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace.
(b)(1)(A)     The Legislative Council shall report on the findings of the
items listed in subsection (a) of this section to the General Assembly.
(B)   A copy of the report shall be sent to the Governor.
(2)     The report shall include without limitation recommendations
for legislation.
(c)   The Legislative Council may utilize a subcommittee created under §
23-61-803(q)(5)(A) to conduct the study of the items in subsection (a) of
this section.
05-01-2017 09:57:56 JMB533
SECTION 3.      Uncodified Section 3 of Acts 2013, No. 1500, is amended to
read as follows:
SECTION 3.      NOT TO BE CODIFIED.   (a)(1)   The health insurance
marketplace developed through a Federally-facilitated Exchange Partnership
model shall transfer to be under the control of the Arkansas Health Insurance
Marketplace on July 1, 2015, if the Board of Directors of the Arkansas Health
Insurance Marketplace determines that the establishment of a state-based
marketplace is approved by the United States Department of Health and Human
Services on or before July 1, 2015.
(2)   The board may extend the date of transfer under subdivision
(a)(1) of this section.
(b)     The board shall participate in the Federally-facilitated Exchange
Partnership to assist in planning the transition to a state-based health
insurance marketplace.
SECTION 4.      Arkansas Code § 10-3-2701 is repealed.
10-3-2701.      Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace Legislative Oversight
Committee.
(a)     The Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace Legislative Oversight
Committee is established.
(b)(1)     The Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace Legislative Oversight
Committee shall consist of the following members of the General Assembly
appointed as follows:
(A)   Six (6) members of the House of Representatives shall
be appointed to the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace Legislative
Oversight Committee by the Speaker of the House of Representatives; and
(B)   Six (6) members of the Senate shall be appointed to
the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace Legislative Oversight Committee by
the President Pro Tempore of the Senate.
(2)   In making appointments, each appointing officer shall select
members who have appropriate experience and knowledge of the issues to be
examined by the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace Legislative Oversight
Committee and may consider racial, gender, and geographical diversity among
the membership.
(c)(1)     The Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace Legislative Oversight
Committee shall study matters pertaining to the Arkansas Health Insurance
05-01-2017 09:57:56 JMB533
Marketplace Act, § 23-61-801 et seq., as the Arkansas Health Insurance
Marketplace Legislative Oversight Committee considers necessary to fulfill
its mandate.
(2)   The Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace Legislative
Oversight Committee may request reports from the Arkansas Health Insurance
Marketplace pertaining to the operations, programs, or finances of the
Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace as it deems necessary.
(d)     Annually by December 15, the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace
Legislative Oversight Committee shall provide to the General Assembly any
analysis or findings resulting from its activities under this section that
the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace Legislative Oversight Committee
deems relevant.
(e)(1)     The President Pro Tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the
House of Representatives shall each designate a cochair of the Arkansas
Health Insurance Marketplace Legislative Oversight Committee.
(2)   The Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace Legislative
Oversight Committee shall meet at least quarterly upon the joint call of the
cochairs of the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace Legislative Oversight
Committee.
(3)   A majority of the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace
Legislative Oversight Committee constitutes a quorum.
(4)   No action may be taken by the Arkansas Health Insurance
Marketplace Legislative Oversight Committee except by a majority vote at a
meeting at which a quorum is present.
(f)     Members of the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace Legislative
Oversight Committee are entitled to per diem and mileage reimbursement at the
same rate authorized by law for attendance at meetings of interim committees
of the General Assembly and shall be paid from the same source.
(g)(1)     With the consent of both the President Pro Tempore of the
Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the Arkansas Health
Insurance Marketplace Legislative Oversight Committee may meet during a
session of the General Assembly to perform its duties under this section.
(2)   This subsection does not limit the authority of the Arkansas
Health Insurance Marketplace Legislative Oversight Committee to meet during a
recess as authorized by § 10-2-223 or § 10-3-211.
05-01-2017 09:57:56 JMB533
SECTION 5.        Arkansas Code § 23-61-803 is amended to read as follows:
23-61-803. Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace.
(a)   There is created a nonprofit legal entity to be known as the
“Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace”.
(b)(1)     The Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace is created as a
political subdivision, instrumentality, and body politic of the State of
Arkansas and, as such, is not a state agency.
(2)   Except to the extent provided by this subchapter, the
Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace is exempt from:
(A)   All state, county, and local taxes; and
(B)   All laws other than the Freedom of Information Act of
1967, § 25-19-101 et seq., governing state agencies, including without
limitation:
(i)    The Arkansas Procurement Law, § 19-11-201 et
seq.;
(ii)     The Uniform Classification and Compensation
Act, § 21-5-201 et seq.; and
(iii)(a)       The Arkansas Administrative Procedure Act,
§ 25-15-201 et seq.
(b)   The Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace
shall adopt policies, procedures, and rules to implement its obligations
under this subchapter.
(3)(A)     Prior to the adoption, amendment, or repeal of any
policy, procedure, or rule, the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace shall:
(i)(a)     Give at least thirty (30) days' notice of its
intended action. The thirty-day period shall begin on the first day of the
publication of notice.
(b)   The notice shall include a statement of
the terms or substance of the intended action or a description of the
subjects and issues involved and the time, the place where, and the manner in
which interested persons may present their views on the intended action or
the subjects and issues involved.
(c)   The notice shall be mailed to any person
specified by law and to all persons who have requested advance notice of
rule-making proceedings.
(d)(1)     Unless otherwise provided by law, the
05-01-2017 09:57:56 JMB533
notice shall be published in a newspaper of general daily circulation for
three (3) consecutive days and, when appropriate, in those trade, industry,
or professional publications that the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace
may select.
(2)   The notice shall be published by the
Secretary of State on the Internet internet for thirty (30) days in
accordance with § 25-15-218; and
(ii)(a)       Afford all interested persons at least
thirty (30) days to submit written data, views, or arguments, orally or in
writing. The thirty-day period shall begin on the first day of the
publication of notice under subdivision (b)(3)(A)(i)(a)         of this section.
(b)    Opportunity for oral hearing shall be
granted if requested by twenty-five (25) persons, by a governmental
subdivision or agency, or by an association having no fewer than twenty-five
(25) members.
(c)    The Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace
shall fully consider all written and oral submissions concerning the proposed
rule before finalizing the language of the proposed rule and filing the
proposed rule as required by subdivision (b)(3)(E) of this section.
(d)    Upon the adoption, amendment, or repeal of
a policy, procedure, or rule, the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace, if
requested to do so by an interested person either prior to adoption,
amendment, or repeal or within thirty (30) days thereafter, shall issue a
concise statement of the principal reasons for and against its adoption,
amendment, or repeal, incorporating therein its reasons for overruling the
considerations urged against its adoption, amendment, or repeal; and
(iii)     Comply with § 25-15-301 et seq. [repealed].
(B)   The thirty-day periods for giving public notice under
subdivision (b)(3)(A)(i)(a)       of this section and for receiving written data,
views, or arguments, orally or in writing, under subdivision (b)(3)(A)(ii)(a)
of this section shall run concurrently.
(C)(i)     If the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace finds
that imminent peril to the public health, safety, or welfare or compliance
with federal laws or regulations requires adoption of a policy, procedure, or
rule upon less than thirty (30) days' notice and states in writing its
reasons for that finding, it may proceed without prior notice or hearing, or
05-01-2017 09:57:56 JMB533
upon any abbreviated notice and hearing that it may choose, to adopt an
emergency rule.
(ii)    The rule may be effective for no longer than
one hundred twenty (120) days.
(iii)    If, after the expiration of the effective
period of an emergency rule, the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace wishes
to adopt a successive emergency rule that is identical or substantially
similar to the expired emergency rule, the Arkansas Health Insurance
Marketplace shall not adopt the successive emergency rule earlier than thirty
(30) days after the expiration of the emergency rule.
(D)(i)     The Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace shall
file with the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace Legislative Oversight
Committee Legislative Council, the Secretary of State, the Arkansas State
Library, and the Bureau of Legislative Research a copy of each policy,
procedure, or rule adopted by it and a statement of financial impact for the
rule.
(ii)    The Secretary of State shall keep a copy of
each policy, procedure, or rule filed under subdivision (b)(3)(D)(i) of this
section in the permanent register required under § 25-15-204(e)(2).
(iii)(a)      The scope of the financial impact statement
shall be determined by the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace but, at a
minimum, shall include the estimated cost of complying with the policy,
procedure, or rule and the estimated cost for the Arkansas Health Insurance
Marketplace to implement the policy, procedure, or rule.
(b)   If the Arkansas Health Insurance
Marketplace has reason to believe that the development of a financial impact
statement will be so speculative as to be cost prohibitive, the Arkansas
Health Insurance Marketplace shall submit a statement and explanation to that
effect.
(c)   If the purpose of an Arkansas Health
Insurance Marketplace policy, procedure, or rule is to implement a federal
rule or regulation, the financial impact statement shall be limited to any
incremental additional cost of the state policy, procedure, or rule, as
opposed to the federal rule or regulation.
(E)(i)(a)        Each policy, procedure, or rule adopted by the
Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace is effective thirty (30) days after the
05-01-2017 09:57:56 JMB533
filing of the final policy, procedure, or rule unless a later date is
specified by law or in the rule itself.
(b)    A final rule shall not be filed until the
thirty-day public comment period required under subdivision (b)(3)(A)(ii)(a)
of this section has expired.
(c)(1)      After the expiration of the thirty-day
public comment period and before the effective date of the rule, the Arkansas
Health Insurance Marketplace shall take appropriate measures to make the
final rule known to the persons who may be affected by the rule.
(2)   Appropriate measures shall include
without limitation posting the following information on the Arkansas Health
Insurance Marketplace's website of the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace:
(A)   The final rule;
(B)   Copies of all written comments
submitted to the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace regarding the rule;
(C)   A summary of all written and
oral comments submitted to the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace
regarding the rule and the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace's response
of the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace to those comments; and
(D)   The proposed effective date of
the final rule.
(ii)(a)      However, an emergency rule may become
effective immediately upon filing or at a stated time less than thirty (30)
days after filing if the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace finds that
this effective date is necessary because of imminent peril to the public
health, safety, or welfare.
(b)    The Arkansas Health Insurance
Marketplace's finding of the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace and a
brief statement of the reasons for the finding shall be filed with the rule.
(c)    The Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace
shall take appropriate measures to make emergency rules known to the persons
who may be affected by the emergency rules.
(F)   The Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace Legislative
Oversight Committee Legislative Council shall review the proposed revised or
amended policy, procedure, or rule and, if it is believed that the rule or
regulation is contrary to legislative intent, shall file a statement thereof
05-01-2017 09:57:56 JMB533
with the Legislative Council Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace.
(c)    The Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace shall operate subject to
the supervision and control of the Board of Directors of the Arkansas Health
Insurance Marketplace. The board shall consist of the following members to be
appointed on or before July 1, 2013:
(1)(A)     Three (3) members appointed by the Governor.
(B)   One (1) member appointed by the Governor shall be a
representative of insurance agents or brokers licensed to sell health
insurance in the State of Arkansas.
(C)   Two (2) members appointed by the Governor shall be
consumer representatives;
(2)(A)     Three (3) members appointed by the President Pro Tempore
of the Senate.
(B)   One (1) of the members appointed by the President Pro
Tempore of the Senate shall be a representative of a health insurer.
(C)   One (1) of the members appointed by the President Pro
Tempore of the Senate shall be a representative of small employers;
(3)(A)     Three (3) members appointed by the Speaker of the House
of Representatives.
(B)   One (1) of the members appointed by the Speaker of the
House of Representatives shall be a representative of a health insurer.
(C)   One (1) member appointed by the Speaker of the House
of Representatives shall be a member of a health-related profession licensed
in the State of Arkansas;
(4)    The Insurance Commissioner or his or her designee as an ex
officio nonvoting member; and
(5)    The Director of the Department of Human Services or his or
her designee as an ex officio nonvoting member.
(d)(1)         Members appointed by the Governor serve at the pleasure of the
Governor.
(2)(A)     The initial members appointed by the President Pro
Tempore of the Senate under subdivision (c)(2) of this section shall serve
terms as follows:
(i)    One (1) initial member shall be appointed to a
term of four (4) years;
(ii)   One (1) initial member shall be appointed to a
05-01-2017 09:57:56 JMB533
term of six (6) years; and
(iii)    One (1) initial member shall be appointed to a
term of eight (8) years.
(B)   A member subsequently appointed to the board under
subdivision (c)(2) of this section shall serve a term of six (6) years.
(3)(A)     The initial members appointed by the Speaker of the House
of Representatives under subdivision (c)(3) of this section shall serve terms
as follows:
(i)     One (1) initial member shall be appointed to a
term of four (4) years;
(ii)    One (1) initial member shall be appointed to a
term of six (6) years; and
(iii)    One (1) initial member shall be appointed to a
term of eight (8) years.
(B)   A member subsequently appointed to the board under
subdivision (c)(3) of this section shall serve a term of six (6) years.
(e)   The appointing authorities under this section shall ensure that a
majority of the voting members of the board have relevant experience in:
(1)   Health benefits administration;
(2)   Healthcare finance;
(3)   Health plan purchasing;
(4)   Healthcare delivery system administration; or
(5)   Public health or health policy issues related to the small
group and individual markets and the uninsured.
(f)   The board shall select one (1) of its members as chair.
(g)(1)     Subject to review by the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace
Legislative Oversight Committee Legislative Council, the board may authorize
by a majority vote of the total membership of the board cast during its first
regularly scheduled meeting of each calendar year:
(A)   Payment to its members of a stipend per day not to
exceed one hundred dollars ($100) for each meeting attended or for any day
while performing substantive business of the board; and
(B)   Reimbursement of actual expenses while performing
substantive business of the board.
(2)   Members of the board shall receive no other compensation,
expense reimbursement, or in-lieu-of payments.
05-01-2017 09:57:56 JMB533
(h)(1)     The board shall hire the Executive Director of the Arkansas
Health Insurance Marketplace to:
(A)   Plan and administer the Arkansas Health Insurance
Marketplace; and
(B)   Employ necessary staff.
(2)   The board may plan and administer the Arkansas Health
Insurance Marketplace and employ necessary staff on an interim basis until
the executive director is hired.
(3)   The employees of the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace
are not eligible to participate in the Arkansas Public Employees' Retirement
System under § 24-4-101 et seq.
(i)(1)     Neither the board nor its employees shall be liable for any
obligations of the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace.
(2)   The board may provide in its bylaws or rules for
indemnification of and legal representation for the board members and board
employees.
(j)(1)     The board shall adopt articles, bylaws, and operating rules in
accordance with this subchapter within ninety (90) days after the appointment
of the board.
(2)   The articles, bylaws, and operating rules shall be reviewed
by the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace Legislative Oversight Committee
Legislative Council.
(k)     The board shall keep an accurate accounting of all activities,
receipts, and expenditures on behalf of the Arkansas Health Insurance
Marketplace and report to the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace
Legislative Oversight Committee Legislative Council as requested by the
Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace Legislative Oversight Committee
Legislative Council.
(l)(1)(A)      On and after July 1, 2015, the board shall have the
authority to apply for and expend on behalf of the Arkansas Health Insurance
Marketplace any state, federal, or private grant funds available to assist
with the implementation and operation of the Arkansas Health Insurance
Marketplace.
(B)   Before July 1, 2015, the board shall coordinate with
the commissioner the application for state, federal, or private grant funds
to plan, implement, and operate the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace.
05-01-2017 09:57:56 JMB533
(2)(A)     Before July 1, 2015, the commissioner may apply for any
state, federal, or private grant funds available to assist with the
implementation and operation of the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace.
(B)   If the commissioner applies for and receives any
state, federal, or private grant funds available to assist with the
implementation and operation of the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace,
the commissioner shall enter into a memorandum of understanding with the
Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace concerning the use and expenditure of
the grant funds.
(m)(1)     The board may contract with eligible entities to assist with
the planning, implementation, and operation of the Arkansas Health Insurance
Marketplace.
(2)   For purposes of this subsection:
(A)   An eligible entity includes without limitation an
entity that has experience in individual and small group health insurance,
benefit administration, or other experience relevant to the responsibilities
to be assumed by the entity; and
(B)   A health insurer or an affiliate of a health insurer
is not an eligible entity.
(3)   In contracting with an eligible entity under subdivision
(m)(1) of this section, the board shall give preference to eligible entities
that have relevant experience.
(4)(A)     The board shall establish a competitive bidding process
for awarding contracts under this subchapter to an eligible entity.
(B)   The competitive bidding process for awarding contracts
under this subchapter to an eligible entity shall be reviewed by the Arkansas
Health Insurance Marketplace Legislative Oversight Committee Legislative
Council.
(n)   The board may enter into information-sharing agreements with
federal and state agencies and other state marketplaces to carry out its
responsibilities under this subchapter, provided such agreements:
(1)   Include adequate protections with respect to the
confidentiality of the information to be shared; and
(2)   Comply with all applicable state and federal laws and
regulations.
(o)   As a condition of participating in the Arkansas Health Insurance
05-01-2017 09:57:56 JMB533
Marketplace, a health insurer shall pay the assessments, submit the reports,
and provide the information required by the board or the commissioner to
implement this subchapter.
(p)     The board and any eligible entity under subdivision (m)(1) of this
section shall provide claims and other plan and enrollment data to the
Department of Human Services and the commissioner upon request to:
(1)   Facilitate compliance with reporting requirements under
state and federal law; and
(2)   Assess the performance of the Health Care Independence
Program established by the Health Care Independence Act of 2013, § 20-77-2401
et seq., if enacted, Arkansas Works Program established by the Arkansas Works
Act of 2016, § 23-61-1001 et seq., including without limitation the program's
quality, cost, and consumer access.
(q)(1)     The Legislative Council may study matters pertaining to this
subchapter that the Legislative Council considers necessary to fulfill its
mandate under this subchapter.
(2)   The Legislative Council may request reports from the
Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace pertaining to the operations, programs,
or finances of the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace as it deems
necessary.
(3)   Annually by December 15, the Legislative Council shall
provide to the General Assembly any analysis or findings resulting from its
activities under this section that the Legislative Council deems relevant.
(4)(A)     During a regular, fiscal, or extraordinary session of the
General Assembly, the Joint Budget Committee shall perform the functions
assigned to the Legislative Council under this subchapter.
(B)   This subsection does not limit the authority of the
Legislative Council and its subcommittees to meet during a recess as
authorized by § 10-2-223 or § 10-3-211.
(5)   The Legislative Council and the Joint Budget Committee may:
(A)   Establish or utilize one (1) or more subcommittees to
assist in its duties under this subchapter;
(B)   Assign information filed with the Legislative Council
under this subchapter to one (1) or more subcommittees of the Legislative
Council or the Joint Budget Committee, including without limitation a
subcommittee created under subdivision (q)(5)(A) of this section; and
05-01-2017 09:57:56 JMB533
(C)   Delegate their duties under this subchapter to one (1)
or more subcommittees of the Legislative Council or the Joint Budget
Committee, subject to the final review and approval of the Legislative
Council or the Joint Budget Committee.
SECTION 6.       Arkansas Code § 23-61-804(a)(B), concerning the duties of
the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace, is amended to read as follows:
(B)   The procedures and criteria shall comply with
applicable:
(i)     Federal law;
(ii)    Federal waivers obtained by the state to
implement the Health Care Independence Program established by the Health Care
Independence Act of 2013, § 20-77-2401 et seq., if enacted Arkansas Works
Program established by the Arkansas Works Act of 2016, § 23-61-1001 et seq.;
and
(iii)    Rules promulgated by the State Insurance
Department and the Department of Human Services under the Health Care
Independence Act of 2013, § 20-77-2401 et seq., if enacted Arkansas Works
Program established by the Arkansas Works Act of 2016, § 23-61-1001 et seq.;
SECTION 7.       Arkansas Code § 23-61-804(13), concerning the duties of the
Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace, is amended to read as follows:
(13)   Otherwise comply with a requirement the board determines is
necessary to obtain or maintain the approval to establish or administer a
state-based health insurance marketplace.
SECTION 8.       Arkansas Code § 23-61-805(a), concerning the funding of the
Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace, is amended to read as follows:
(a)(1)     The General Assembly shall establish a reasonable initial
assessment or user fee and reasonable increases or decreases in the amount of
future assessments or user fees and penalties and interest charges for
nonpayment of an assessment or user fee charged to participating health
insurers for the efficient operation of the Arkansas Health Insurance
Marketplace.
(2)    Beginning October 1, 2014, and annually Annually by October
1 thereafter, the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace shall report to the
05-01-2017 09:57:56 JMB533
Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace Legislative Oversight Committee
Legislative Council in the manner and format that the Arkansas Health
Insurance Marketplace Legislative Oversight Committee Legislative Council
requires the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace's recommendations of the
Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace for the initial assessment or user fee
and increases or decreases in the amount of future assessments or user fees
and penalties and interest charges for nonpayment of an assessment or user
fee charged to participating health insurers.
(3)   Beginning January 1, 2015, and annually by January 1
thereafter Annually by December 1, the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace
Legislative Oversight Committee Legislative Council shall review the
recommendations of the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace under
subdivision (a)(1) of this section and report to the President Pro Tempore of
the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives the Arkansas
Health Insurance Marketplace Legislative Oversight Committee's
recommendations of the Legislative Council for the initial assessment or user
fee and future increases or decreases in the amount of assessments or user
fees and penalties and interest charges for nonpayment of an assessment or
user fee charged to participating health insurers.
SECTION 9.      Arkansas Code § 23-61-805, concerning the funding and
publication of costs of the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace, is amended
to add an additional subsection to read as follows:
(e)(1)     Annually, the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace shall
report the following information to the Legislative Council:
(A)   The total amount of assessment fees or user fees
collected;
(B)   The administrative costs and expenditure of the
Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace, including without limitation salaries
of employees, supply costs, building rental costs, and technology costs;
(C)   The amount of any other funds received by the Arkansas
Health Insurance Marketplace; and
(D)   Other budgetary or financial matters relating to the
Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace.
(2)   The Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace shall disclose and
provide additional budgetary or financial information upon the request of the
05-01-2017 09:57:56 JMB533
Legislative Council or the Joint Budget Committee.
SECTION 10.   EMERGENCY CLAUSE.   It is found and determined by the
General Assembly of the State of Arkansas that this act requires the transfer
of oversight from the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace Legislative
Oversight Committee to the Legislative Council and requires the Legislative
Council to study various aspects of the Arkansas Health Insurance
Marketplace; that the studies to be conducted by the Legislative Council are
necessary to determine the future direction of the Arkansas Health Insurance
Marketplace; and that this act is immediately necessary because the
Legislative Council needs to be able to begin the oversight and study of the
Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace at the earliest possible date.
Therefore, an emergency is declared to exist, and this act being immediately
necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health, and safety shall
become effective on:
(1)   The date of its approval by the Governor;
(2)   If the bill is neither approved nor vetoed by the Governor,
the expiration of the period of time during which the Governor may veto the
bill; or
(3)   If the bill is vetoed by the Governor and the veto is
overridden, the date the last house overrides the veto.
05-01-2017 09:57:56 JMB533