     Stricken language would be deleted from and underlined language would be added to present law.



State of Arkansas                                                                          Call Item 5
91st General Assembly                         A Bill
Second Extraordinary Session, 2018                                                     SENATE BILL 2


By: Senators Caldwell, Rapert, Bledsoe, Bond, E. Cheatham, L. Chesterfield, A. Clark, Collins-Smith, J.
Cooper, L. Eads, Elliott, J. English, Flippo, T. Garner, J. Hendren, Hickey, J. Hutchinson, K. Ingram,
Irvin, B. Johnson, B. King, U. Lindsey, Maloch, Rice, B. Sample, D. Sanders, G. Stubblefield, Teague, D.
Wallace
By: Representatives M. Gray, Wardlaw, Murdock, Gazaway, F. Allen, Baltz, Barker, Bentley, Blake,
Boyd, Bragg, Brown, Capp, Cavenaugh, Coleman, Cozart, Dalby, Davis, Deffenbaugh, C. Douglas, D.
Douglas, Drown, Eaves, Farrer, D. Ferguson, K. Ferguson, Fielding, C. Fite, L. Fite, V. Flowers, Fortner,
Gates, Gillam, M.J. Gray, Hammer, Henderson, K. Hendren, Hillman, G. Hodges, M. Hodges, Holcomb,
Hollowell, Jean, Jett, Leding, Lemons, Lowery, Lundstrum, Lynch, Maddox, Magie, A. Mayberry,
McElroy, McNair, D. Meeks, S. Meeks, Miller, Nicks, Payton, Penzo, Petty, Pilkington, Richey,
Richmond, Rushing, Rye, Sabin, B. Smith, Sorvillo, Speaks, Sturch, Sullivan, Tosh, Tucker, Vaught,
Walker, Warren, Watson, D. Whitaker, Wing


                                   For An Act To Be Entitled
                AN ACT TO CREATE THE ARKANSAS PHARMACY BENEFITS
                MANAGER LICENSURE ACT; TO REGULATE AND LICENSE
                PHARMACY BENEFITS MANAGERS; TO AUTHORIZE PENALTIES
                AND FINES REGARDING THE REGULATION AND LICENSURE OF
                PHARMACY BENEFITS MANAGERS; TO DECLARE AN EMERGENCY;
                AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.




                                                Subtitle
                        TO CREATE THE ARKANSAS PHARMACY BENEFITS
                        MANAGER LICENSURE ACT; AND TO DECLARE AN
                        EMERGENCY.




BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF ARKANSAS:


        SECTION 1.      Arkansas Code Title 23, Chapter 92, is amended to add an
additional subchapter to read as follows:



*JMB579*                                                                   03/12/2018 4:24:23 PM JMB579
                                                                                  SB2


       Subchapter 5 — Arkansas Pharmacy Benefits Manager Licensure Act


     23-92-501.        Title.
     This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Arkansas
Pharmacy Benefits Manager Licensure Act".


     23-92-502.        Purpose.
     (a)    This subchapter establishes the standards and criteria for the
regulation and licensure of pharmacy benefits managers providing claims
processing services or other prescription drug or device services for health
benefit plans.
     (b)    The purpose of this subchapter is to:
              (1)   Promote, preserve, and protect the public health, safety,
and welfare through effective regulation and licensure of pharmacy benefits
managers;
              (2)   Provide for powers and duties of the Insurance Commissioner,
the State Insurance Department, and other state agencies and officers; and
              (3)   Prescribe penalties and fines for violations of this
subchapter.


     23-92-503.        Definitions.
     As used in this subchapter:
              (1)   "Claims processing services" means the administrative
services performed in connection with the processing and adjudicating of
claims relating to pharmacist services that include:
                       (A)   Receiving payments for pharmacist services;
                       (B)   Making payments to pharmacists or pharmacies for
pharmacist services; or
                       (C)   Both subdivisions (1)(A) and (B) of this section;
              (2)(A)     "Health benefit plan" means any individual, blanket, or
group plan, policy, or contract for healthcare services issued or delivered
by a healthcare insurer in this state.
                       (B)   “Health benefit plan” does not include:
                             (i)     Accidental-only plans;
                             (ii)    Specified disease plans;
                             (iii)    Disability income plans;

                                           2             03/12/2018 4:24:23 PM JMB579
                                                                                  SB2


                          (iv)    Plans that provide only for indemnity for
hospital confinement;
                          (v)     Long-term care only plans that do not include
pharmacy benefits;
                          (vi)    Other limited-benefit health insurance policies
or plans; or
                          (vii)    Health benefit plans provided under Arkansas
Constitution, Article 5, § 32, the Workers' Compensation Law, § 11-9-101 et
seq., and the Public Employee Workers' Compensation Act, § 21-5-601 et seq.;
           (3)   "Healthcare insurer" means an insurance company, a health
maintenance organization, or a hospital and medical service corporation;
           (4)   "Other prescription drug or device services" means services
other than claims processing services, provided directly or indirectly,
whether in connection with or separate from claims processing services,
including without limitation:
                    (A)   Negotiating rebates, discounts, or other financial
incentives and arrangements with drug companies;
                    (B)   Disbursing or distributing rebates;
                    (C)   Managing or participating in incentive programs or
arrangements for pharmacist services;
                    (D)   Negotiating or entering into contractual arrangements
with pharmacists or pharmacies, or both;
                    (E)   Developing formularies;
                    (F)   Designing prescription benefit programs; or
                    (G)   Advertising or promoting services;
           (5)   "Pharmacist" means an individual licensed as a pharmacist by
the Arkansas State Board of Pharmacy;
           (6)   "Pharmacist services" means products, goods, and services,
or any combination of products, goods, and services, provided as a part of
the practice of pharmacy as defined in § 17-92-101;
           (7)   "Pharmacy" means the same as defined in § 17-92-101;
           (8)(A)     "Pharmacy benefits manager" means a person, business, or
entity, including a wholly or partially owned or controlled subsidiary of a
pharmacy benefits manager, that provides claims processing services or other
prescription drug or device services, or both, for health benefit plans.
                    (B)   "Pharmacy benefits manager" does not include any:

                                        3             03/12/2018 4:24:23 PM JMB579
                                                                                   SB2


                              (i)     Healthcare facility licensed in Arkansas;
                              (ii)    Healthcare professional licensed in Arkansas;
                              (iii)    Consultant who only provides advice as to the
selection or performance of a pharmacy benefits manager; or
                              (iv)    Entity that provides claims processing services
or other prescription drug or device services for the fee-for-service
Arkansas Medicaid Program only in that capacity;
              (9)    "Pharmacy benefits manager affiliate" means a pharmacy or
pharmacist that directly or indirectly, through one (1) or more
intermediaries, owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under
common ownership or control with a pharmacy benefits manager;
              (10)   “Pharmacy benefits manager network” means a network of
pharmacists or pharmacies that are offered by an agreement or insurance
contract to provide pharmacist services for health benefit plans;
              (11)   "Pharmacy benefits plan or program" means a plan or program
that pays for, reimburses, covers the cost of, or otherwise provides for
pharmacist services under a health benefit plan;
              (12)   "Pharmacy services administrative organization" means an
organization that helps community pharmacies and pharmacy benefits managers
or third party payers achieve administrative efficiencies, including
contracting and payment efficiencies;
              (13)(A)       "Rebate" means a discount or other price concession
based on utilization of a prescription drug that is paid by a manufacturer or
third party, directly or indirectly, to a pharmacy benefits manager, pharmacy
services administrative organization, or pharmacy after a claim has been
processed and paid at a pharmacy.
                      (B)    "Rebate" includes without limitation incentives,
disbursements, and reasonable estimates of a volume-based discount; and
              (14)   "Third party" means a person, business, or entity other
than a pharmacy benefits manager that is not an enrollee or insured in a
health benefit plan.


     23-92-504.       License to do business — Annual statement — Assessment.
     (a)(1)     A person or organization shall not establish or operate as a
pharmacy benefits manager in Arkansas for health benefit plans without
obtaining a license from the Insurance Commissioner under this subchapter.

                                            4             03/12/2018 4:24:23 PM JMB579
                                                                                  SB2


              (2)   The commissioner shall prescribe the application for a
license to operate in Arkansas as a pharmacy benefits manager and may charge
application fees and renewal fees as established by rule.
     (b)(1)     The commissioner shall issue rules establishing the licensing,
fees, application, financial standards, and reporting requirements of
pharmacy benefits managers under this subchapter.
              (2)(A)     When adopting the initial rules to implement this
subchapter, the final rule shall be filed with the Secretary of State for
adoption under § 25-15-204(f):
                             (i)    On or before September 1, 2018; or
                             (ii)   If approval under § 10-3-309 has not occurred
by September 1, 2018, as soon as practicable after approval under § 10-3-309.
                       (B)   The State Insurance Department shall file the proposed
rule with the Legislative Council under § 10-3-309(c) sufficiently in advance
of September 1, 2018, so that the Legislative Council may consider the rule
for approval before September 1, 2018.


     23-92-505.        Pharmacy benefits manager network adequacy.
     A pharmacy benefits manager shall provide:
              (1)(A)     A reasonably adequate and accessible pharmacy benefits
manager network for the provision of prescription drugs for a health benefit
plan that shall provide for convenient patient access to pharmacies within a
reasonable distance from a patient's residence.
                       (B)   A mail-order pharmacy shall not be included in the
calculations determining pharmacy benefits manager network adequacy; and
              (2)   A pharmacy benefits manager network adequacy report
describing the pharmacy benefits manager network and the pharmacy benefits
manager network's accessibility in this state in the time and manner required
by rule issued by the State Insurance Department.


     23-92-506.        Compensation — Prohibited practices.
     (a)(1)     The Insurance Commissioner may review and approve the
compensation program of a pharmacy benefits manager with a health benefit
plan to ensure that the reimbursement for pharmacist services paid to a
pharmacist or pharmacy is fair and reasonable to provide an adequate pharmacy
benefits manager network for a health benefit plan under the standards issued

                                          5             03/12/2018 4:24:23 PM JMB579
                                                                               SB2


by rule of the State Insurance Department.
           (2)   All information and data acquired during the review under
subdivision (a)(1) of this section is:
                    (A)   Considered proprietary and confidential under § 23-61-
107(a)(4) and § 23-61-207; and
                    (B)   Not subject to the Freedom of Information Act of 1967,
§ 25-19-101 et seq.
     (b)   A pharmacy benefits manager or representative of a pharmacy
benefits manager shall not:
           (1)   Cause or knowingly permit the use of any advertisement,
promotion, solicitation, representation, proposal, or offer that is untrue,
deceptive, or misleading;
           (2)   Unless reviewed and approved by the commissioner, charge a
pharmacist or pharmacy a fee related to the adjudication of a claim,
including without limitation a fee for:
                    (A)   The receipt and processing of a pharmacy claim;
                    (B)   The development or management of claims processing
services in a pharmacy benefits manager network; or
                    (C)   Participation in a pharmacy benefits manager network;
           (3)   Unless reviewed and approved by the commissioner in
coordination with the Arkansas State Board of Pharmacy, require pharmacy
accreditation standards or certification requirements inconsistent with, more
stringent than, or in addition to requirements of the board;
           (4)(A)     Reimburse a pharmacy or pharmacist in the state an amount
less than the amount that the pharmacy benefits manager reimburses a pharmacy
benefits manager affiliate for providing the same pharmacist services.
                    (B)   The amount shall be calculated on a per-unit basis
using the same generic product identifier or generic code number; or
           (5)   Do any combination of the actions listed in subdivisions
(b)(1)-(4) of this section.
     (c)   A claim for pharmacist services shall not be retroactively denied
or reduced after adjudication of the claim, unless:
           (1)   The original claim was submitted fraudulently;
           (2)   The original claim payment was incorrect because the
pharmacy or pharmacist had already been paid for the pharmacist services; or
           (3)   The pharmacist services were not properly rendered by the

                                      6             03/12/2018 4:24:23 PM JMB579
                                                                                 SB2


pharmacy or pharmacist.
        (d)   Termination of a pharmacy or pharmacist from a pharmacy benefits
manager network shall not release the pharmacy benefits manager from the
obligation to make any payment due to the pharmacy or pharmacist for
pharmacist services properly rendered.
        (e)   The commissioner may issue a rule establishing prohibited
practices of pharmacy benefits managers providing claims processing services
or other prescription drug or device services for health benefit plans.


        23-92-507.      Gag clauses prohibited.
        (a)   The prohibitions under § 23-99-407 apply to participation
contracts between pharmacy benefits managers and pharmacists or pharmacies
providing prescription drug coverage for health benefit plans.
        (b)   A pharmacy or pharmacist may provide to an insured information
regarding the insured's total cost for pharmacist services for a prescription
drug.
        (c)   A pharmacy or pharmacist shall not be proscribed by a pharmacy
benefits manager from discussing information regarding the total cost for
pharmacist services for a prescription drug or from selling a more affordable
alternative to the insured if a more affordable alternative is available.
        (d)   A pharmacy benefits manager contract with a participating
pharmacist or pharmacy shall not prohibit, restrict, or limit disclosure of
information to the Insurance Commissioner, law enforcement, or state and
federal governmental officials investigating or examining a complaint or
conducting a review of a pharmacy benefits manager's compliance with the
requirements under this subchapter.


        23-92-508.      Enforcement.
        (a)   The Insurance Commissioner shall enforce this subchapter.
        (b)(1)     The commissioner may examine or audit the books and records of
a pharmacy benefits manager providing claims processing services or other
prescription drug or device services for a health benefit plan to determine
if the pharmacy benefits manager is in compliance with this subchapter.
                 (2)   The information or data acquired during an examination under
subdivision (b)(1) of this section is:
                        (A)   Considered proprietary and confidential under § 23-61-

                                          7             03/12/2018 4:24:23 PM JMB579
                                                                              SB2


107(a)(4) and § 23-61-207; and
                     (B)   Not subject to the Freedom of Information Act of 1967,
§ 25-19-101 et seq.


     23-92-509.      Rules.
     (a)(1)     The Insurance Commissioner may adopt rules regulating pharmacy
benefits managers that are not inconsistent with this subchapter.
              (2)   Rules that the commissioner may adopt under this subchapter
include without limitation rules relating to:
                     (A)   Licensing;
                     (B)   Application fees;
                     (C)   Financial solvency requirements;
                     (D)   Pharmacy benefits manager network adequacy;
                     (E)   Prohibited market conduct practices;
                     (F)   Data reporting requirements under § 4-88-803;
                     (G)   Compliance and enforcement requirements under § 17-92-
507 concerning Maximum Allowable Cost Lists;
                     (H)   Rebates;
                     (I)   Compensation; and
                     (J)   Lists of health benefit plans administered by a
pharmacy benefits manager in this state.
     (b)   Rules adopted under this subchapter shall set penalties or fines,
including without limitation monetary fines, suspension of licensure, and
revocation of licensure for violations of this subchapter and rules adopted
under this subchapter.
     (c)(1)     In addition to the filing requirements under the Arkansas
Administrative Procedure Act, § 25-15-201 et seq., and under § 10-3-309, the
State Insurance Department shall file a proposed rule or a proposed amendment
to an existing rule under this subchapter with the Senate Committee on
Insurance and Commerce and the House Committee on Insurance and Commerce at
least thirty (30) days before the expiration of the period for public comment
under the Arkansas Administrative Procedure Act, § 25-15-201 et seq.
              (2)   The Senate Committee on Insurance and Commerce and the House
Committee on Insurance and Commerce shall review the proposed rule or
proposed amendment to an existing rule within forty-five (45) days of the
date the proposed rule or proposed amendment to an existing rule is filed

                                        8            03/12/2018 4:24:23 PM JMB579
                                                                                    SB2


with the Senate Committee on Insurance and Commerce and the House Committee
on Insurance and Commerce.
              (3)(A)     If the department adopts an emergency rule under this
subchapter, in addition to the filing requirements under the Arkansas
Administrative Procedure Act, § 25-15-201 et seq., and under § 10-3-309, the
department shall notify the following individuals of the emergency rule and
provide each individual with a copy of the rule within five (5) business days
of adopting the rule:
                             (i)     The Speaker of the House of Representatives;
                             (ii)    The President Pro Tempore of the Senate;
                             (iii)    The Chair of the Senate Committee on Insurance
and Commerce; and
                             (iv)    The Chair of the House Committee on Insurance
and Commerce.
                       (B)   The Senate Committee on Insurance and Commerce and the
House Committee on Insurance and Commerce shall review the emergency rule
within forty-five (45) days of the date that the emergency rule is provided
to the Chair of the Senate Committee on Insurance and Commerce and the Chair
of the House Committee on Insurance and Commerce.


     23-92-510.        Applicability.
     (a)   This subchapter is applicable to a contract or health benefit plan
issued, renewed, recredentialed, amended, or extended on and after September
1, 2018.
     (b)   A contract existing on the date of licensure of the pharmacy
benefits manager shall comply with the requirements of this subchapter as a
condition of licensure for the pharmacy benefits manager.


     SECTION 2.        Arkansas Code § 4-88-803, concerning required practices
under the Fair Disclosure of State Funded Payments for Pharmacists' Services
Act, is amended to add a new subsection to read as follows:
     (d)(1)     Unless otherwise required more frequently by the Insurance
Commissioner, a pharmacy benefits manager shall file an annual report with
the commissioner providing the information required under subsection (a) of
this section pursuant to the timing, format, and requirements issued by rule
of the State Insurance Department.

                                           9             03/12/2018 4:24:23 PM JMB579
                                                                                   SB2


              (2)   The annual report is:
                     (A)   Considered proprietary and confidential under § 23-61-
107(a)(4) and § 23-61-207; and
                     (B)   Not subject to the Freedom of Information Act of 1967,
§ 25-19-101 et seq.
              (3)   This section is not subject to § 4-88-113(f)(1)(B).


     SECTION 3.      Arkansas Code § 17-92-507(g), concerning the Maximum
Allowable Cost Lists, is amended to read as follows:
     (g)(1)     A violation of this section is a deceptive and unconscionable
trade practice under the Deceptive Trade Practices Act, § 4-88-101 et seq.,
and a prohibited practice under the Arkansas Pharmacy Benefits Manager
Licensure Act, § 23-92-501 et seq., and the Trade Practices Act, § 23-66-201
et seq.
              (2)   This section is not subject to § 4-88-113(f)(1)(B).


     SECTION 4.      Effective on and after September 1, 2018, Arkansas Code §
23-92-201 is amended to read as follows:
     23-92-201.      Definitions Definition.
     As used in this subchapter:, "third-party administrator":
              (1)   “Pharmacy benefits manager” means an entity that administers
or manages a pharmacy benefits plan or program;
              (2)   “Pharmacy benefits plan or program” means a plan or program
that pays for, reimburses, covers the cost of, or otherwise provides
pharmacist services to individuals who reside in or are employed in this
state; and
              (3)(A)(1)    “Third-party administrator” means Means a person,
firm, or partnership that collects or charges premiums from or adjusts or
settles claims on residents of this state in connection with life or accident
and health coverage provided by a self-insured plan or a multiple employer
trust or multiple employer welfare arrangement.;
                     (B)(2)     “Third-party administrator” includes: Includes
                              (i)    An an administrative-services-only contract
offered by insurers and health maintenance organizations; and
                              (ii)   A pharmacy benefits manager that administers or
manages a pharmacy benefits plan or program that furnishes, covers the cost

                                          10             03/12/2018 4:24:23 PM JMB579
                                                                                  SB2


of, or otherwise provides for the practice of pharmacy as defined in § 17-92-
101 under any life and accident and health coverage provided in this state by
a self-insured plan, a multiple-employer trust, or a multiple-employer-
welfare arrangement.
                  (C)(3)     “Third-party administrator” does Does not include:
                           (i)(A)     An employer, for its employees or for the
employees of a subsidiary or affiliated corporation of the employer;
                           (ii)(B)    A union, for its members;
                           (iii)(C)    An insurer or health maintenance
organization licensed to do business in this state;
                           (iv)(D)    A creditor, for its debtors, regarding
insurance covering a debt between the creditor and its debtors;
                           (v)(E)     A credit-card-issuing company that advances
for, or collects premiums or charges from, its credit card holders, as long
as that company does not adjust or settle claims;
                           (vi)(F)    An individual who adjusts or settles claims
in the normal course of his or her practice or employment and who does not
collect charges or premiums in connection with life or accident and health
coverage; or
                           (vii)(G)    An agency licensed by the Insurance
Commissioner and performing duties pursuant to an agency contract with an
insurer authorized to do business in this state.


     SECTION 5.   DO NOT CODIFY.        SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.    If any provision of
this act or the application of this act to any person or circumstance is held
invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of
this act which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end, the provisions of this act are declared
severable.


     SECTION 6.   EFFECTIVE DATE CLAUSE.
     SECTION 4 of this act is effective on and after September 1, 2018.


     SECTION 7.   EMERGENCY CLAUSE.          It is found and determined by the
General Assembly of the State of Arkansas that the unregulated behavior of
pharmacy benefits managers is threatening the sustainability of pharmacies in

                                        11               03/12/2018 4:24:23 PM JMB579
                                                                             SB2


Arkansas; that regulation of pharmacy benefits managers by the State
Insurance Department will stabilize the pharmacy industry in this state; and
that Section 1, 2, 3, and 5 of this act are immediately necessary to ensure
that Arkansas residents have continued access to pharmacy services across the
state. Therefore, an emergency is declared to exist, and Sections 1, 2, 3,
and 5 of this act, being immediately necessary for the preservation of the
public peace, health, and safety, shall become effective on:
           (1)   The date of the act's approval by the Governor;
           (2)   If the bill is neither approved nor vetoed by the Governor,
the expiration of the period of time during which the Governor may veto the
bill; or
           (3)   If the bill is vetoed by the Governor and the veto is
overridden, the date the last house overrides the veto.




                                  12             03/12/2018 4:24:23 PM JMB579
