     Stricken language would be deleted from and underlined language would be added to present law.



State of Arkansas                                                                        Call Item 8
91st General Assembly                        A Bill
Second Extraordinary Session, 2018                                                   SENATE BILL 7


By: Senator G. Stubblefield
By: Representative Bentley


                                  For An Act To Be Entitled
               AN ACT TO EXEMPT CERTAIN PROPERTY UNDER THE CONTROL
               AND MANAGEMENT OF THE STATE PARKS, RECREATION, AND
               TRAVEL COMMISSION FROM REQUIREMENTS OF THE BUILDING
               AUTHORITY DIVISION OF THE DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE AND
               ADMINISTRATION; TO DECLARE AN EMERGENCY; AND FOR
               OTHER PURPOSES.




                                              Subtitle
                        TO AMEND THE REQUIREMENT FOR CERTAIN
                        PROPERTY UNDER THE CONTROL AND MANAGEMENT
                        OF THE STATE PARKS, RECREATION, AND
                        TRAVEL COMMISSION; AND TO DECLARE AN
                        EMERGENCY.




BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF ARKANSAS:


       SECTION 1.       Arkansas Code § 22-2-102, concerning the definitions used
in the Building Authority Division Act, is amended to add an additional
subdivision to read as follows:
               (4)    "Unpaved trail project" means a project to create a trail:
                        (A)    That is on property under the immediate control and
management of the State Parks, Recreation, and Travel Commission;
                        (B)   That is either:
                               (1)    To be used solely for recreational purposes; or
                               (2)    Otherwise necessary to carry out the mission of
the commission; and



*MLD018*                                                                 03/13/2018 8:10:21 AM MLD018
                                                                               SB7


                    (C)   For which the labor, services, and commodities are
donated.


     SECTION 2.     Arkansas Code § 22-2-108(9)(B), concerning the powers and
duties of the Building Authority Division of the Department of Finance and
Administration, is amended to read as follows:
                    (B)   However, the division shall not:
                           (i) engage Engage in the production of architectural
plans and specifications, with the exception that the architects and
engineers employed by the division may provide and make available technical
assistance to the division's sections listed in § 22-2-107 and other agencies
regarding capital improvements involving roofing projects, repairs,
alterations, or renovations; or
                           (ii)   Apply minimum design and construction standards
and criteria to the design or construction of an unpaved trail project.


     SECTION 3.     Arkansas Code § 22-2-113(a)(7) and (8), concerning the
duties of the Building Authority Division of the Department of Finance and
Administration regarding the schedule of supervision of capital improvement
projects, are amended to read as follows:
           (7)(A)     Review and approve construction plans so as to ensure
compliance with minimum construction standards and criteria promulgated by
the director as provided in this chapter;.
                    (B)(i) This subdivision (a)(7) does not apply to the design
or construction of an unpaved trail project.
                           (ii)   The State Parks, Recreation, and Travel
Commission shall ensure that an unpaved trail project created under this
subdivision (a)(7) meets the standards for observation by registered
professionals as established by the division.
           (8)(A)     As agent for the agency, negotiate and approve all
construction contracts, and revisions, and modifications thereto necessary
for the capital improvement;.
                    (B)(i) This subdivision (a)(8) does not apply to the design
or construction of an unpaved trail project.
                           (ii)   The State Parks, Recreation, and Travel
Commission shall ensure that an unpaved trail project created under this

                                       2             03/13/2018 8:10:21 AM MLD018
                                                                                 SB7


subdivision (a)(8) adheres to applicable public works laws.


     SECTION 4.     Arkansas Code § 22-9-101(c), concerning the requirement of
observation by registered professionals for capital improvements of public
works, is amended to read as follows:
     (c)   This section shall does not apply to:
           (1)      any A school district, county, municipality, or township
project that is planned and executed according to plans and specifications
furnished by authorized state agencies; or
           (2)(A)     The design or construction of an unpaved trail project as
defined under § 22-2-102.
                    (B)   The State Parks, Recreation, and Travel Commission
shall ensure that an unpaved trail project created under this subdivision
(c)(2) meets the standards for observation by registered professionals as
established by the Building Authority Division of the Department of Finance
and Administration.


     SECTION 5.     EMERGENCY CLAUSE.       It is found and determined by the
General Assembly of the State of Arkansas that the efficient design and
construction of unpaved trail projects on property of the State Parks,
Recreation, and Travel Commission will increase economic development in the
state; that certain regulatory requirements have delayed unpaved trail
projects in the state; that it is in the best interest of the state to remove
certain regulatory burdens on these unpaved trail projects; and that the
immediate implementation of this act will allow for the expedited design and
construction of these unpaved trail projects and improve economic development
across the state through the ability to immediately improve Arkansas's state
parks and increase tourism.     Therefore, an emergency is declared to exist,
and this act being immediately necessary for the preservation of the public
peace, health, and safety shall become effective on:
           (1)    The date of its approval by the Governor;
           (2)    If the bill is neither approved nor vetoed by the Governor,
the expiration of the period of time during which the Governor may veto the
bill; or
           (3)    If the bill is vetoed by the Governor and the veto is
overridden, the date the last house overrides the veto.

                                        3               03/13/2018 8:10:21 AM MLD018
