     Stricken language would be deleted from and underlined language would be added to present law.



State of Arkansas                                                                        Call Item 7
91st General Assembly                        A Bill
Second Extraordinary Session, 2018                                                HOUSE BILL 1003


By: Representatives Maddox, Bentley, Capp, Pilkington, Vaught
By: Senators Teague, G. Stubblefield


                                  For An Act To Be Entitled
               AN ACT TO AMEND THE LAW CONCERNING THE DEFENSES TO
               PROSECUTION FOR A VIOLATION OF OPERATING AN ALL-
               TERRAIN VEHICLE UPON A PUBLIC STREET OR HIGHWAY; TO
               DECLARE AN EMERGENCY; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.




                                              Subtitle
                        TO AMEND THE LAW CONCERNING THE DEFENSES
                        TO PROSECUTION FOR A VIOLATION OF
                        OPERATING AN ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE UPON A
                        PUBLIC STREET OR HIGHWAY; AND TO DECLARE
                        AN EMERGENCY.




BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF ARKANSAS:


       SECTION 1.       Arkansas Code § 27-21-109 is amended to read as follows:
       27-21-109.       Defenses to prosecution — Definition.
       (a)    It is no not a defense to a prosecution under this chapter that
the driver or operator possesses a valid driver's license or motorcycle
operator's license.
       (b)    It shall be is a defense to prosecution under § 27-21-106 for a
violation of operating an all-terrain vehicle upon the public streets or
highways a public street or highway if the all-terrain vehicle operator can
show by a preponderance of the evidence that:
               (1)    The public street or highway was outside the city limits of
any municipality or incorporated town in Arkansas;
               (2)    The public street or highway was not an interstate highway;



*DTP341*                                                                  03/12/2018 4:22:19 PM DTP341
                                                                              HB1003


             (3)   Traveling on the public street or highway was the most
reasonable route of access available to him or her from:
                   (A)     The One off-road trail where he or she parked the
motor vehicle used to transport the all-terrain vehicle to another off-road
trail; or
                   (B)     His or her private property to an off-road trail or to
a tract of land that is private property; and
             (4)(A)   His or her purpose for riding on the public street or
highway was to get from:
                            (i)    The (A)   One off-road trail where he or she
parked the motor vehicle used to transport the all-terrain vehicle to another
off-road trail; or
                            (ii) (B)   His or her private property to an off-road
trail or to a tract of land that is private property.
                   (B)     However, an all-terrain vehicle shall not travel more
than three (3) miles on a public street or highway to get to one (1) of the
destinations authorized under subdivision (b)(4)(A) of this section.
      (c)   As used in this section, “his or her private property” means real
property that an operator of an all-terrain vehicle:
             (1)   Owns;
             (2)   Leases;
             (3)   Resides at with the owner or lessee of the real property; or
             (4)   Is staying at for a specific period of time as an invitee,
including without limitation a:
                   (A)     Vacation resort;
                   (B)     Rental cabin;
                   (C)     Deeded timeshare; or
                   (D)     Right-to-use timeshare.
      (d)(1)    An operator of an all-terrain vehicle shall:
                   (A)     Carry proof when operating an all-terrain vehicle on a
public street or highway of:
                            (i)    His or her property interest in the private
property; and
                            (ii)   The location of his or her private property;
and
                   (B)     Display upon demand of a peace officer the proof

                                         2              03/12/2018 4:22:19 PM DTP341
                                                                              HB1003


required by subdivision (d)(1) of this section.
           (2)    A person operating an all-terrain vehicle with a private
property owner who presents the proof required by subdivision (d)(1)(A) of
this section shall have the same authority as the private property owner to
operate his or her all-terrain vehicle on a public street or highway for the
purposes of this section.


     SECTION 2.   EMERGENCY CLAUSE.       It is found and determined by the
General Assembly of the State of Arkansas that Arkansas offers an abundance
of all-terrain vehicle parks and trails which attract nationwide all-terrain
vehicle tourism to the state; that riding all-terrain vehicles is one of the
fastest growing recreational uses of the state's national forests; that there
are small businesses that rely heavily on the all-terrain vehicle tourism
generated by the state's all-terrain vehicle parks and trails; and that the
current restriction imposed by Acts 2017, No. 272, limiting the operation of
an all-terrain vehicle upon a public street or highway is detrimental to the
economic well-being of small businesses catering to all-terrain vehicle
tourism and to the overall all-terrain vehicle tourism of the state.
Therefore, an emergency is declared to exist, and this act being immediately
necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health, and safety shall
become effective on:
           (1)    The date of its approval by the Governor;
           (2)    If the bill is neither approved nor vetoed by the Governor,
the expiration of the period of time during which the Governor may veto the
bill; or
           (3)    If the bill is vetoed by the Governor and the veto is
overridden, the date the last house overrides the veto.




                                      3               03/12/2018 4:22:19 PM DTP341
