     Stricken language would be deleted from and underlined language would be added to present law.



State of Arkansas
92nd General Assembly                        A Bill
Regular Session, 2019                                                                SENATE BILL 3


By: Senator T. Garner


                                  For An Act To Be Entitled
               AN ACT TO REQUIRE ADDITIONAL REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
               BY CERTAIN PHYSICIANS AND HEALTHCARE FACILITIES FOR
               ABORTION COMPLICATIONS; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.




                                                Subtitle
                        TO REQUIRE ADDITIONAL REPORTING
                        REQUIREMENTS BY CERTAIN PHYSICIANS AND
                        HEALTHCARE FACILITIES FOR ABORTION
                        COMPLICATIONS.




BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF ARKANSAS:


       SECTION 1.       Arkansas Code Title 20, Chapter 16, Subchapter 6, is
amended to add an additional section to read as follows:
       20-16-605.       Reporting requirements for abortion complications.
       (a)    As used in this section:
               (1)(A)     "Abortion complication" means any harmful event or
adverse outcome with respect to a patient related to an abortion that is
performed on the patient and that is diagnosed or treated by a physician or
at a healthcare facility.
                        (B)   "Abortion complication" includes without limitation:
                               (i)     Shock;
                               (ii)    Uterine perforation;
                               (iii)     Cervical laceration;
                               (iv)    Hemorrhage;
                               (v)     Aspiration or allergic response;
                               (vi)    Infection;



*JMB032*                                                                 11/15/2018 9:44:53 AM JMB032
                                                                                 SB3


                            (vii)    Sepsis;
                            (viii)     Death;
                            (ix)     Incomplete abortion;
                            (x)     Damage to the uterus; and
                            (xi)     An infant born alive after an abortion
procedure; and
               (2)   "Healthcare facility" means a hospital, abortion facility,
or healthcare facility that provides emergency medical care.
         (b)   This section applies only to:
               (1)   A physician who:
                     (A)   Performs at an abortion facility an abortion that
results in an abortion complication diagnosed or treated by the physician; or
                     (B)   Diagnoses or treats at an abortion facility an
abortion complication that is the result of an abortion performed by another
physician at the abortion facility; and
               (2)   A healthcare facility.
         (c)(1)(A)   A physician described under subdivision (b)(1) of this
section shall electronically submit to the Department of Health a report on
each abortion complication diagnosed or treated by the physician not later
than the end of the third business day after the date on which the abortion
complication was diagnosed or treated.
                     (B)   A healthcare facility described under subdivision
(b)(2) of this section shall electronically submit to the department a report
on each abortion complication diagnosed or treated by the healthcare facility
not later than the thirtieth day after the date on which the abortion
complication was diagnosed or treated.
               (2)   The reports described in subdivision (c)(1) of this section
shall:
                     (A)   Be submitted in the form and manner prescribed by rule
of the department;
                     (B)   Identify the name of the physician submitting the
report or the name and type of healthcare facility submitting the report;
                     (C)   Not identify by any means the physician performing the
abortion or the patient on whom the abortion was performed;
                     (D)   Include the most specific, accurate, and complete
reporting for the highest level of specificity; and

                                          2             11/15/2018 9:44:53 AM JMB032
                                                                                   SB3


                    (E)   Include the following information, if known, for each
abortion complication:
                           (i)     The date of the abortion that caused or may have
caused the abortion complication;
                           (ii)     The type of abortion that caused or may have
caused the abortion complication;
                           (iii)    The gestational age of the fetus at the time
that the abortion was performed;
                           (iv)     The name and type of healthcare facility in
which the abortion was performed;
                           (v)     The date the abortion complication was diagnosed
or treated;
                           (vi)     The name and type of any healthcare facility
other than the reporting healthcare facility in which the abortion
complication was diagnosed or treated;
                           (vii)    A description of the abortion complication;
                           (viii)     The patient's year of birth, race, marital
status, state of residence, and county of residence;
                           (ix)     The date of the first day of the patient's last
menstrual period that occurred before the date of the abortion that caused or
may have caused the abortion complication, if known;
                           (x)     The number of previous live births of the
patient; and
                           (xi)     The number of previous induced abortions of the
patient.
     (d)(1)     The department shall develop and publish on the website of the
department an annual report that aggregates on a statewide basis each
abortion complication reported under this section.
              (2)   The annual report shall not include any duplicative data.
     (e)(1)     The information and records held by the department under this
section are confidential and shall not be disclosed under the Freedom of
Information Act of 1967, ยง 25-19-101 et seq.
              (2)   The information and records shall be released only in the
following circumstances:
                    (A)   For statistical purposes, but only if a person,
patient, or healthcare facility is not identified;

                                         3             11/15/2018 9:44:53 AM JMB032
                                                                                SB3


                    (B)   With the consent of each person, patient, and
healthcare facility identified in the information released;
                    (C)   For the purpose of enforcing this section, to medical
personnel, appropriate state agencies, county courts, or district courts; or
                    (D)   For the purpose of enforcing state licensing laws, to
appropriate state licensing boards.
     (f)(1)     A physician or healthcare facility that violates this section
is subject to a civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500) for each
violation.
              (2)   The Attorney General, at the request of the department or
appropriate licensing board, may file an action to recover a civil penalty
assessed under subdivision (f)(1) of this section and may recover attorney's
fees and costs incurred in bringing the civil action.
              (3)   Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a
separate violation.
              (4)   A third separate violation of this section shall constitute
grounds for:
                    (A)   Revocation or suspension of the physician's or the
healthcare facility's license, permit, registration, certificate, or other
authority; or
                    (B)   Other disciplinary action against the physician or
healthcare facility by the appropriate licensing board.
              (5)   The department shall notify the Arkansas State Medical Board
of any violations of this section by a physician.




                                      4             11/15/2018 9:44:53 AM JMB032
