     Stricken language would be deleted from and underlined language would be added to present law.



State of Arkansas
92nd General Assembly                        A Bill
Regular Session, 2019                                                             HOUSE BILL 1027


By: Representative Rye


                                  For An Act To Be Entitled
               AN ACT TO REQUIRE AN INSURER TO PROVIDE COVERAGE FOR
               RENTAL CAR REIMBURSEMENT UNTIL AN INSURED'S DAMAGED
               MOTOR VEHICLE IS REPAIRED; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.




                                              Subtitle
                        TO REQUIRE AN INSURER TO PROVIDE COVERAGE
                        FOR RENTAL CAR REIMBURSEMENT UNTIL AN
                        INSURED'S DAMAGED MOTOR VEHICLE IS
                        REPAIRED.




BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF ARKANSAS:


       SECTION 1.        Arkansas Code ยง 23-79-306, concerning the requirements for
a commercial property and casualty insurance policy, is amended to add an
additional subdivision to read as follows:
               (9)      An insurer that writes motor vehicle insurance shall provide
coverage for any rental care reimbursement until an insured's damaged motor
vehicle is repaired.


       SECTION 2.        Arkansas Code ยง 23-89-202 is amended to read as follows:
       23-89-202.        Required first party coverage.
       Every automobile liability insurance policy covering any private
passenger motor vehicle issued or delivered in this state shall provide
minimum medical and hospital benefits, income disability, and accidental
death benefits, and rental car reimbursement under policy provisions and on
forms approved by the Insurance Commissioner to the named insured and members
of his or her family residing in the same household injured in a motor



*ANS031*                                                                   12/5/2018 2:40:27 PM ANS031
                                                                           HB1027


vehicle accident, to passengers injured while occupying the insured motor
vehicle, and to persons other than those occupying another vehicle struck by
the insured motor vehicle, without regard to fault, as follows:
             (1)   Medical and Hospital Benefits.   All reasonable and necessary
expenses for medical, hospital, nursing, dental, surgical, ambulance, funeral
expenses, and prosthetic services incurred within twenty-four (24) months
after the automobile accident, up to an aggregate of five thousand dollars
($5,000) per person, and may include any nonmedical remedial care and
treatment rendered in accordance with a recognized religious method of
healing.   Expenses for hospital room charges may be limited to semiprivate
accommodations;
             (2)   Income Disability Benefits.    Seventy percent (70%) of the
loss of income from work during a period commencing eight (8) days after the
date of the accident, and not to exceed fifty-two (52) weeks, but subject to
a maximum of one hundred forty dollars ($140) per week.     In the case of a
nonincome earner, the benefits shall consist of expenses not to exceed
seventy dollars ($70.00) per week, or any fractional part of a week, which
are reasonably incurred for essential services in lieu of those the injured
person would have performed without income during a period commencing eight
(8) days after the date of the accident and not to exceed fifty-two (52)
weeks; and
             (3)   Accidental Death Benefits.    The sum of five thousand dollars
($5,000), to be paid to the personal representative of the insured, should
injury, sickness, or disease resulting from an automobile accident cause
death within one (1) year from the date of the accident; and
             (4)   Rental car reimbursement until an insured's damaged motor
vehicle is repaired.


     SECTION 3.    Arkansas Code Title 23, Chapter 89, Subchapter 2, is
amended to add an additional section to read as follows:
     23-89-217.    Rental car reimbursement coverage required.
     An insurer that writes motor vehicle insurance shall provide coverage
for rental car reimbursement in an automobile liability insurance policy
until an insured's damaged motor vehicle is repaired.




                                     2                12/5/2018 2:40:27 PM ANS031
