     Stricken language would be deleted from and underlined language would be added to present law.



State of Arkansas
92nd General Assembly                        A Bill
Regular Session, 2019                                                                SENATE BILL 2


By: Senator T. Garner


                                  For An Act To Be Entitled
               AN ACT TO CREATE THE DOWN SYNDROME DISCRIMINATION BY
               ABORTION PROHIBITION ACT; TO PROHIBIT ABORTION FOR
               THE PURPOSE OF GENETIC SELECTION BECAUSE THE UNBORN
               CHILD HAS OR MAY HAVE DOWN SYNDROME; AND FOR OTHER
               PURPOSES.




                                              Subtitle
                        TO CREATE THE DOWN SYNDROME
                        DISCRIMINATION BY ABORTION PROHIBITION
                        ACT.




BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF ARKANSAS:


       SECTION 1.       Arkansas Code Title 20, Chapter 16, is amended to add an
additional subchapter to read as follows:
   Subchapter 20 — Down Syndrome Discrimination by Abortion Prohibition Act


       20-16-2001.       Title.
       This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Down Syndrome
Discrimination by Abortion Prohibition Act".


       20-16-2002.       Definitions.
       As used in this subchapter:
               (1)(A)     “Abortion” means the act of using or prescribing any
instrument, medicine, drug, or any other substance, device, or means with the
intent to terminate the clinically diagnosable pregnancy of a woman, with
knowledge that the termination by any of those means will with reasonable



*JMB033*                                                                11/15/2018 10:04:10 AM JMB033
                                                                                  SB2


likelihood cause the death of the unborn child.
                     (B)   An act under subdivision (1)(A) of this section is not
an abortion if the act is performed with the intent to:
                            (i)     Save the life or preserve the health of the
unborn child or the pregnant woman;
                            (ii)    Remove a dead unborn child caused by
spontaneous abortion; or
                            (iii)    Remove an ectopic pregnancy;
            (2)   "Down Syndrome" means a chromosome disorder associated with
either:
                     (A)   An extra copy of the chromosome 21, in whole or in
part; or
                     (B)   An effective trisomy for chromosome 21;
            (3)   "Physician" means a person licensed to practice medicine in
this state, including a medical doctor and a doctor of osteopathy; and
            (4)   “Unborn child” means the offspring of human beings from
conception until birth.


     20-16-2003.      Prohibition — Genetic selection.
     (a)    A physician or other person shall not intentionally perform or
attempt to perform an abortion with the knowledge that a pregnant woman is
seeking an abortion solely on the basis of:
            (1)   A test result indicating Down Syndrome in an unborn child;
            (2)   A prenatal diagnosis of Down Syndrome in an unborn child; or
            (3)   Any other reason to believe that an unborn child has Down
Syndrome.
     (b)    Before performing an abortion, the physician or other person
performing the abortion shall:
            (1)(A)     Ask the pregnant woman if she is aware of any test
results, prenatal diagnosis, or any other reason that the unborn child may
have Down Syndrome.
                     (B)   If the pregnant woman knows of any test results,
prenatal diagnosis, or any other reason that the unborn child may have Down
Syndrome, the physician or other person who is performing the abortion shall
inform the pregnant woman of the prohibition of abortion for genetic
selection; and

                                          2            11/15/2018 10:04:10 AM JMB033
                                                                                   SB2


              (2)(A)     Request the medical records of the pregnant woman
relating directly to the entire pregnancy history of the woman.
                       (B)   An abortion shall not be performed until reasonable
time and effort is spent to obtain the medical records of the pregnant woman
as described in subdivision (b)(2)(A) of this section.
     (c)   If this section is held invalid as applied to the period of
pregnancy prior to viability, then this section shall remain applicable to
the period of pregnancy subsequent to viability.


     20-16-2004.        Criminal penalties.
     A physician or other person who knowingly performs or attempts to
perform an abortion prohibited by this subchapter is guilty of a Class D
felony.


     20-16-2005.        Civil penalties and professional sanctions.
     (a)(1)     A physician who knowingly violates this subchapter is liable
for damages and shall have his or her medical license revoked as applicable.
              (2)   The physician may also be enjoined from future acts
prohibited by this subchapter.
     (b)(1)     A woman who receives an abortion in violation of this
subchapter without being informed of the prohibition of abortion for genetic
selection, the parent or legal guardian of the woman if the woman is a minor
who is not emancipated, or the legal guardian of the woman if the woman has
been adjudicated incompetent, may commence a civil action for any reckless
violation of this subchapter and may seek both actual and punitive damages.
              (2)   Damages may include without limitation:
                       (A)   Money damages for any psychological and physical
injuries occasioned by the violation of this subchapter; and
                       (B)   Statutory damages equal to ten (10) times the cost of
the abortion performed in violation of this subchapter.
     (c)   A physician or other person who performs an abortion in violation
of this subchapter shall be considered to have engaged in unprofessional
conduct and his or her license to provide healthcare services in this state
shall be revoked by the Arkansas State Medical Board.
     (d)(1)     A cause of action for injunctive relief against any physician
or other person who has knowingly violated this subchapter may be maintained

                                         3            11/15/2018 10:04:10 AM JMB033
                                                                              SB2


by:
                     (A)   A person who is the spouse, parent, guardian, or
current or former licensed healthcare provider of the woman who receives or
attempts to receive an abortion in violation of this subchapter; or
                     (B)   The Attorney General.
               (2)   The injunction shall prevent the physician or other person
from performing further abortions in violation of this subchapter.


      20-16-2006.      Exclusion of liability for a woman who undergoes
prohibited abortion.
      (a)   A woman who receives or attempts to receive an abortion in
violation of this subchapter shall not be prosecuted under this subchapter
for conspiracy to violate this subchapter or otherwise be held criminally or
civilly liable for any violation of this subchapter.
      (b)   In a criminal proceeding or action brought under this subchapter,
a woman who receives or attempts to receive an abortion in violation of this
subchapter is entitled to all rights, protections, and notifications afforded
to crime victims.
      (c)(1)     In a civil proceeding or action brought under this subchapter,
the anonymity of the woman who receives or attempts to receive the abortion
in violation of this subchapter shall be preserved from public disclosure
unless she gives her consent to disclosure.
               (2)   A court of competent jurisdiction, upon motion or sua
sponte, shall issue orders to the parties, witnesses, and counsel and direct
the sealing of the record and exclusion of individuals from the courtroom or
hearing room to the extent necessary to safeguard the identity of the woman
from public disclosure.


      20-16-2007.      Right of intervention.
      The General Assembly by joint resolution may appoint one (1) or more of
its members who sponsored or cosponsored this subchapter in his or her
official capacity to intervene as a matter of right in any case in which the
constitutionality of this law is challenged.




                                       4            11/15/2018 10:04:10 AM JMB033
