     Stricken language would be deleted from and underlined language would be added to present law.



State of Arkansas
92nd General Assembly                        A Bill
Regular Session, 2019                                                                SENATE BILL 4


By: Senator T. Garner


                                  For An Act To Be Entitled
                AN ACT TO CREATE THE ARKANSAS LEGISLATIVE TASK FORCE
                ON VETERANS AFFAIRS; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.




                                              Subtitle
                        TO CREATE THE ARKANSAS LEGISLATIVE TASK
                        FORCE ON VETERANS AFFAIRS.




BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF ARKANSAS:


       SECTION 1.       TEMPORARY LANGUAGE.         DO NOT CODIFY.       Arkansas Legislative
Task Force on Veterans Affairs – Creation – Membership – Duties.
       (a)    There is created the Arkansas Legislative Task Force on Veterans
Affairs.
       (b)(1)       The task force shall consist of the following twenty-eight (28)
members of the General Assembly:
                        (A)   The President Pro Tempore of the Senate, or his or her
designee who is a member of the Senate;
                        (B)   A member of the Senate to serve as Senate cochair of
the task force, appointed by the President Pro Tempore of the Senate;
                        (C)   Six (6) members of the Senate appointed by the Senate
cochair of the task force;
                        (D)   The Speaker of the House of Representatives, or his or
her designee who is a member of the House of Representatives;
                        (E)   A member of the House of Representatives to serve as
House of Representatives cochair of the task force, appointed by the Speaker
of the House of Representatives; and
                        (F)   Eighteen (18) members of the House of Representatives,



*JET013*                                                                  11/15/2018 9:45:02 AM JET013
                                                                                   SB4


appointed by the House of Representatives cochair of the task force.
              (2)   If a vacancy occurs on the task force, the vacancy shall be
filled by the same process as the original appointment.
              (3)   The members of the task force shall be paid per diem and
mileage as authorized by law for attendance at meetings of interim committees
of the General Assembly.
     (c)(1)     The cochairs shall call the first meeting of the task force
within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this act.
              (2)   In order to interact directly with veterans throughout the
State of Arkansas, the task force may hold meetings at various sites
throughout the state.
              (3)   Meetings of the task force shall be held at least one (1)
time every three (3) months but may occur more often at the call of the
cochairs.
              (4)   The task force shall establish rules and procedures for
conducting its business.
              (5)(A)     A majority of the members of the task force shall
constitute a quorum for transacting business of the task force.
                       (B)   An affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum present
is required for the passage of a motion or other task force action.
              (6)   The Bureau of Legislative Research shall provide staff for
the task force.
     (d)(1)     The purpose of the task force is to conduct a study of
veterans' issues within the State of Arkansas, including without limitation a
study regarding the occurrence of suicide among the veteran population in
this state.
              (2)   In carrying out its purpose, the task force shall:
                       (A)   Study risk factors for suicide in veterans;
                       (B)   Review and research options for preventing or reducing
the occurrence of suicide among the veteran population in the state;
                       (C)   Examine mental health care available to veterans
within the state;
                       (D)   Conduct at least one (1) town-hall-style meeting to
hear from veterans in the state and their concerns regarding mental health
care and other issues affecting veterans in the state;
                       (E)   Engage the following:

                                         2             11/15/2018 9:45:02 AM JET013
                                                                                SB4


                          (i)     The Department of Veterans Affairs;
                          (ii)    The Department of Health; and
                          (iii)    Mental health professionals licensed to
practice in this state;
                 (F)   Review best practices among other states;
                 (G)   Review methods to create a statewide program targeting
suicide prevention and preventative mental health care for veterans; and
                 (H)   Study and review other issues that the task force
deems relevant to improving the productivity and wellness of veterans
residing in this state.
     (e)   The task force may establish an advisory board to assist the task
force in accomplishing its purposes as stated in this act.        If the task force
determines that creation of an advisory board would be beneficial, it shall
adopt rules regarding the membership and duties of the advisory board.
     (f)   The task force shall file with the Governor, the Speaker of the
House of Representatives, and the President Pro Tempore of the Senate a final
written report on or before December 1, 2020.
     (g)   The task force shall expire on December 31, 2020.




                                        3             11/15/2018 9:45:02 AM JET013
