     Stricken language would be deleted from and underlined language would be added to present law.



State of Arkansas
92nd General Assembly                        A Bill
Regular Session, 2019                                                             HOUSE BILL 1003


By: Representative Gazaway


                                  For An Act To Be Entitled
               AN ACT TO AMEND THE STATE ANTIBULLYING POLICY; TO
               REQUIRE THAT A SCHOOL BOARD MEMBER RECEIVE BULLYING
               AND CYBERBULLYING PREVENTION TRAINING; TO INCLUDE
               BULLYING AND CYBERBULLYING PREVENTION TRAINING WITHIN
               A PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM; TO CREATE THE
               POSITIONS OF SCHOOL ANTIBULLYING SPECIALIST AND
               DISTRICT ANTIBULLYING COORDINATOR; TO ESTABLISH A
               WEEK OF KINDNESS; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.




                                              Subtitle
                        TO AMEND THE ANTIBULLYING POLICY; TO
                        REQUIRE ANTIBULLYING TRAINING; TO CREATE
                        THE POSITIONS OF ANTIBULLYING SPECIALIST
                        AND DISTRICT ANTIBULLYING COORDINATOR;
                        AND TO ESTABLISH A WEEK OF KINDNESS.




BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF ARKANSAS:


       SECTION 1.       LEGISLATIVE INTENT.         DO NOT CODIFY.
       The General Assembly finds that:
               (1)      A 2016 study, “Indicators of School Crime and Safety,”
published by the United States Department of Justice and the United States
Department of Education, reported that twenty-one percent (21%) of students
twelve (12) through eighteen (18) years of age were injured as a result of
bullying in the previous school year.               The study also reported that about
thirty-three percent (33%) of students who reported being bullied at school
indicated that they were bullied at least once or twice a month during the



*TNL058*                                                                  11/15/2018 4:33:02 PM TNL058
                                                                             HB1003


school year;
             (2)     A 2017 study by the United States Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, “Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance", reported that
Arkansas ranks number first in the nation for the percentage of teenagers who
were bullied on school property;
             (3)     The chronic persistence of school bullying has led to
instances of student suicides across the country, including Arkansas;
             (4)     Significant research has emerged since Arkansas enacted its
public school antibullying statutes in 2003 and its cyberbullying law in
2011;
             (5)     School districts and students, parents, teachers,
principals, other school staff, and school district boards of directors would
benefit from the establishment of clearer standards regarding what
constitutes bullying, and clearer standards concerning how to prevent,
report, investigate, and respond to incidents of bullying;
             (7)     It is the intent of the General Assembly in enacting this
legislation to strengthen the standards and procedures for preventing,
reporting, investigating, and responding to incidents of bullying of students
that occur on and off school property;
             (8)     Fiscal responsibility requires Arkansas to take a smarter,
clearer approach to fight school bullying by ensuring that existing resources
are better managed and used to make schools safer for students;
             (9)     In keeping with the goal of fiscal responsibility and in an
effort to minimize any burden placed on schools and school districts,
existing personnel and resources shall be utilized in every possible instance
to accomplish the goals of increased prevention, reporting, investigation,
and responsiveness to incidents of bullying, including without limitation the
appointment of school antibullying specialists and district antibullying
coordinators; and
             (10)    By strengthening standards for preventing, reporting,
investigating, and responding to incidents of bullying, this act will help to
reduce the risk of suicide among students and avert not only the needless
loss of a young life, but also the tragedy that such loss represents to the
student’s family and the community-at-large.


        SECTION 2.   Arkansas Code § 6-13-629(a)(3)(A), concerning the training

                                       2             11/15/2018 4:33:02 PM TNL058
                                                                               HB1003


and instruction of school board members, is amended to read as follows:
              (3)(A)   The training and instruction required under this section
shall include:
                           (i)    topics Topics relevant to school laws, and
school operations,; and
                           (ii)   the The powers, duties, and responsibilities of
the members of the board of directors, including without limitation:
                           (i)(a)    Legal requirements, including without
limitation:
                                  (a)(1)     The items listed or required by the
Legislative Joint Auditing Committee under § 6-1-101; and
                                  (b)(2)     Other financial laws or regulations
designated by the Department of Education;
                           (ii)(b)    Role differentiation;
                           (iii)(c)     Financial management, including without
limitation how to read and interpret an audit report; and
                           (iv)(d)    Improving student achievement.; and
                           (iii)(a)     A program on bullying as defined in § 6-18-
514 in schools and the relationship bullying has to student suicide rates.
                                  (b)   A member shall be required to complete the
program in subdivision (a)(3)(A)(iii)(a) of this section only one (1) time.


     SECTION 3.     Arkansas Code § 6-17-708 is amended to read as follows:
     6-17-708. Teen suicide awareness and bullying prevention professional
development.
     (a)(1)    The Department of Education shall require two (2) hours of
professional development in teen suicide awareness and prevention for
licensed public school personnel according to the professional development
schedule under § 6-17-709 per year.
              (2)   The professional development under this section:
                    (A)   may May be accomplished through self-review of
suitable suicide prevention materials approved by the department.; and
                    (B)   Shall include information on the relationship between
the risk of suicide and incidents of bullying.
     (b)   The professional development under this section shall count toward
the satisfaction of requirements for professional development in the

                                         3              11/15/2018 4:33:02 PM TNL058
                                                                           HB1003


Standards for Accreditation of Arkansas Public Schools and School Districts
and for licensure requirements for licensed personnel.
     (c)(1)   In addition to the professional development requirement under
(a)(2) of this section, the department shall develop a guidance document for
use by parents and legal guardians, students, and school districts to assist
in resolving complaints concerning student bullying behaviors.
           (2)    The guidance document shall include:
                  (A)    A school district's obligations under § 6-18-514;
                  (B)    Best practices for the prevention, reporting,
investigation, and response to bullying in schools, including without
limitation methods to identify and assist student populations at a higher
risk for bullying; and
                  (C)    A clear explanation of the:
                          (i)    Procedures for petitioning the Commissioner of
Education to hear and decide incidents under § 6-18-514; and
                          (ii)   Process for appealing final agency
determinations to the circuit court of the county in which the school
district is located.


     SECTION 4.   Arkansas Code § 6-18-514(b)(2)-(5), concerning antibullying
policies in public schools, is amended to read as follows:
           (2)(A)   “Bullying” means the intentional harassment,
intimidation, humiliation, ridicule, defamation, or threat or incitement of
violence by a student against another student or public school employee by a
written, verbal, electronic, or physical act that may address an attribute of
the other student, public school employee, or person with whom the other
student or public school employee is associated and that causes or creates
actual or reasonably foreseeable:
                  (A)(i)    Physical harm to a public school employee or
student or damage to the public school employee's or student's property;
                  (B)(ii)    Substantial interference with a student's
education or with a public school employee's role in education;
                  (C)(iii)      A hostile educational environment for one (1) or
more students or public school employees due to the severity, persistence, or
pervasiveness of the act; or
                  (D)(iv)    Substantial disruption of the orderly operation of

                                       4             11/15/2018 4:33:02 PM TNL058
                                                                             HB1003


the school or educational environment;.
                    (B)   "Bullying" includes cyberbullying as defined in this
section;
              (3)   "Cyberbullying" means any form of communication by
electronic act that is sent with the purpose to harass, intimidate,
humiliate, ridicule, defame, or threaten or incite violence to a student,
public school employee, or person with whom the other student or public
school employee is associated;
              (3)(4)   “Electronic act” means without limitation a communication
or image transmitted by means of an electronic device, including without
limitation a telephone, wireless phone or other wireless communications
device, computer, or pager;
              (4)(5)   “Harassment” means a pattern of unwelcome verbal or
physical conduct relating to another person's constitutionally or statutorily
protected status that causes, or reasonably should be expected to cause,
substantial interference with the other's performance in the school
environment; and
              (6)   "School personnel" means any individual employed by a school
district who maintains regular contact with students, including without
limitation:
                    (A)   A teacher;
                    (B)   A paraprofessional;
                    (C)   An administrator;
                    (D)   A member of the support staff;
                    (E)   A bus driver;
                    (F)   A cafeteria worker; and
                    (G)   Any other school employee or individual contracted
with a school district who regularly interacts with students; and
              (5)(7)   “Substantial disruption” means without limitation that
any one (1) or more of the following occur as a result of the bullying:
                    (A)   Necessary cessation of instruction or educational
activities;
                    (B)   Inability of students or educational staff to focus on
learning or function as an educational unit because of a hostile environment;
                    (C)   Severe or repetitive disciplinary measures are needed
in the classroom or during educational activities; or

                                       5            11/15/2018 4:33:02 PM TNL058
                                                                               HB1003


                   (D)   Exhibition of other behaviors by students or
educational staff that substantially interfere with the learning environment.


      SECTION 4.   Arkansas Code § 6-18-514(d)-(j), concerning antibullying
policies in public schools, is amended to read as follows:
      (d)   A school principal or his or her designee who receives a credible
report or complaint of bullying shall:
             (1)   On the same day, report to a student's parent or legal
guardian any credible complaint or report that the student is:
                   (A)   Alleged to be the victim of a bullying incident; or
                   (B)   Accused of being a perpetrator of a bullying incident;
             (2)   promptly Promptly:
                   (A)(i)   investigate Investigate the complaint or report in
collaboration with the school antibullying specialist as provided under § 6-
18-517.
                          (ii)(a)   The investigation shall be completed as soon
as possible, but not later than ten (10) school days from the date of the
written report of the alleged incident of bullying.
                               (b)   In the event that there is information
relative to the investigation that is anticipated but not yet received by the
end of the ten-day period, the school principal and antibullying specialist
may amend the original report of the results of the investigation to reflect
the information.
                               (c)(1)       The results of the investigation shall
be reported to the school district superintendent within two (2) school days
of the completion of the investigation.
                                        (2)   The school district superintendent
may decide to:
                                               (A)   Provide intervention services;
                                               (B)   Establish training programs to
reduce bullying;
                                               (C)   Impose discipline;
                                               (D)   Order counseling; or
                                               (E)   Take or recommend other
appropriate action.
                               (d)   The results of each investigation of a

                                        6              11/15/2018 4:33:02 PM TNL058
                                                                               HB1003


bullying incident shall be reported to the school district board of directors
no later than the date of the next school district board of directors meeting
following the completion of the investigation, along with any services
provided, training established, discipline imposed, or other action taken or
recommended by the school district superintendent.
                        (iii)   A parent or legal guardian of a student who is
a party to the investigation:
                                (a)   Is entitled within five (5) school days
after the results of the investigation are reported to the school district
board of directors, and in accordance with federal and state law, to receive
information about the investigation including without limitation:
                                       (1)   The nature of the investigation;
                                       (2)   Whether the school district found
evidence of bullying;
                                       (3)   The nature of the discipline imposed
or services provided to address the incident of bullying; and
                                       (4)   Copies of all written reports
involved in the investigation; and
                                (b)(1)    May request a hearing before the school
district board of directors after receiving the results of the investigation.
                                       (2)   The hearing shall be held within
forty-five (45) days of the parent or legal guardian's request.
                                       (3)   The school district board of
directors:
                                              (A)   Shall meet in executive
session for the hearing to protect the confidentiality of the students;
                                              (B)   May hear:
                                                    (i)    From the school
antibullying specialist about the incident;
                                                    (ii)    Recommendations for
discipline or services and any programs instituted to reduce incidents of
bullying; and
                                                    (iii)   From any student
involved in the bullying incident, any material witnesses to the bullying
incident, a parent or legal guardian of a student involved in the bullying
incident, or any attorney or other designated representative of any involved

                                      7               11/15/2018 4:33:02 PM TNL058
                                                                           HB1003


party.
                                     (4)(A)   At the next school district board
of directors meeting following the receipt of the report of the investigation
of a bullying incident, the school district board of directors shall issue a
written decision to affirm, reject, or modify the superintendent's decision.
                                           (B)   The school district board of
directors' decision may be appealed to the Commissioner of Education no later
than thirty (30) days after the issuance of the school district board of
directors' decision.
                  (B)(i)   and make Make a written record of the investigation
and any action taken as a result of the investigation.
                         (ii)   The written record of the investigation shall
include a detailed description of the alleged bullying event, including
without limitation a statement from all material witnesses to the event;
                  (C)   Discuss, as appropriate, the availability of
counseling and other intervention services; and
                  (D)   Notify the school district superintendent of the
action taken regarding the bullying incident.
     (e)(1)   Two (2) times each school year, between September 1 and January
1 and between January 1 and June 30, the superintendent of the school
district shall report to the school district board of directors at a public
hearing all acts of bullying that occurred during the previous preceding
period.   The report shall include without limitation the:
                  (A)   Number of reports of bullying;
                  (B)   Status of all investigations of bullying;
                  (C)   Nature of the bullying incident;
                  (D)   Names of the investigators;
                  (E)   Type and nature of any discipline imposed on any
student involved in an incident of bullying; and
                  (F)   Other measures imposed, training conducted, or
programs implemented, if any, to reduce bullying incidents.
            (2)(A)   The information reported by the school district
superintendent to the school district board of directors shall be reported
once during each reporting period to the Department of Education.
                  (B)   The report shall include data from each school in the
district and district-wide data.

                                     8             11/15/2018 4:33:02 PM TNL058
                                                                               HB1003


                    (C)   The report shall not improperly release any
confidential information not authorized for public release by federal or
state law.
             (3)   The report required under this subdivision (e)(1) of this
section shall be:
                    (A)(i)   Used by the department to grade each school
district for purposes of assessing the school district's effort to implement
policies and programs consistent with this section.
                           (ii)    The school district shall receive a grade
determined by averaging the grades of all schools in the district.
                           (iii)   The Commissioner of Education shall promulgate
rules concerning a program to grade schools.
                           (iv)    The school and school district grade shall be:
                                   (a)   Posted on the homepage of the school and
school district website within ten (10) days of the receipt of the grade by
the school and the school district; and
                                   (b)   Linked to the school district's website;
and
                    (B)(i)   Included as part of the department's monitoring of
a school district.
                           (ii)    The State Board of Education shall adopt rules
that impose a penalty on a school personnel member who knowingly falsifies
the report as required under this subsection.
      (f)(1)   The commissioner shall each year submit a report to the House
Committee on Education and Senate Committee on Education detailing the extent
of bullying in public schools and making recommendations to alleviate the
problem.
             (2)   The report shall be:
                    (A)   Made available annually to the public; and
                    (B)   Posted on the department website.
      (g)(1)   A school personnel member who observes or has direct knowledge
from a participant or victim of an act of bullying shall file a written
report describing the incident to the school principal in a manner prescribed
by the antibullying policy.
             (2)   A copy of the written report shall be sent to the school
district superintendent.

                                         9             11/15/2018 4:33:02 PM TNL058
                                                                          HB1003


     (e)(1)(h)(1)   The board of directors of every school district shall
adopt policies to prevent bullying.
            (2)   The policies shall:
                  (A)(i)   Clearly define conduct that constitutes bullying.
                         (ii)   The definition shall include without limitation
the definition contained in subsection (b) of this section;
                  (B)   Prohibit bullying:
                         (i)    While in school, on school equipment or
property, in school vehicles, on school buses, at designated school bus
stops, at school-sponsored activities, or at school-sanctioned events, and
off of school grounds when the school district employee is made aware of an
alleged incident off of school grounds; or
                         (ii)(a)   By an electronic act that results in the
substantial disruption of the orderly operation of the school or educational
environment.
                                (b)   This section shall apply to an electronic
act whether or not the electronic act originated on school property or with
school equipment, if the electronic act is directed specifically at students
or school personnel and maliciously intended for the purpose of disrupting
school and has a high likelihood of succeeding in that purpose;
                  (C)   State the consequences for engaging in the prohibited
conduct, which may vary depending on the age or grade of the student
involved;
                  (D)   Require that a school employee school personnel member
who has witnessed or has reliable information that a pupil has been a victim
of bullying as defined by the district shall report the incident to the
principal as soon as possible;
                  (E)   Require that the any person or persons who file files
a report or makes a complaint of bullying will not be subject to retaliation
or reprisal in any form;
                  (F)   Include consequences for a person found to have
falsely accused another as a means of retaliation or as a means of bullying;
                  (F)(G)   Require that notice of what constitutes bullying,
that bullying is prohibited, and that the consequences of engaging in
bullying be conspicuously posted in every classroom, cafeteria, restroom,
gymnasium, auditorium, and school bus in the district; and

                                      10            11/15/2018 4:33:02 PM TNL058
                                                                            HB1003


                    (G)(H)   Require that copies of the notice of what
constitutes bullying, that bullying is prohibited, and that the consequences
of engaging in bullying be provided to parents, students, school volunteers,
and employees school personnel members annually. Each policy shall require
that a full copy of the policy be made available upon request.;
                    (I)   Require that, as soon as practicable, a school
principal or his or her designee report to a student's parent or legal
guardian any credible complaint or report of a student who is involved in a
bullying incident, whether a student is the victim or perpetrator of the
alleged bullying;
                    (J)   Include a:
                           (i)    Statement of how the policy is to be publicized;
and
                           (ii)   Link to the policy on the home page of the
school district's website;
                    (K)(i)   Identify the role of the school antibullying
specialist and district antibullying coordinator as provided under § 6-18-
517.
                           (ii)   The name, school phone number, school address,
and school email address of the school antibullying specialist and district
antibullying coordinator shall be listed on the home page of the school
district's website;
                    (L)   Describe the required standard of conduct and behavior
expected from each student; and
                    (M)   List the range of ways in which a school will respond
once an incident of bullying is identified, including an appropriate
combination of counseling, support services, intervention services, and other
programs as defined by the department.
            (3)   A notice of the school district’s policy shall appear in
any:
                    (A)   Publication of the school district that sets forth the
comprehensive rules, procedures, and standards of conduct for schools within
the school district; and
                    (B)   Student handbook.
            (4)   The     school district shall, to the extent required, annually
conduct a reevaluation, reassessment, and review of its antibullying policy

                                       11             11/15/2018 4:33:02 PM TNL058
                                                                         HB1003


and make any necessary revisions and additions.
      (f)(i)   A school district shall provide training on compliance with the
antibullying policies to all public school district employees responsible for
reporting or investigating bullying under this section.
      (g)(j)   A school employee who has reported violations under the school
district's policy shall be immune from any tort liability that may arise from
the failure to remedy the reported incident.
      (h)(k)   The board of directors of a school district may provide
opportunities for school employees personnel members to participate in
programs or other activities designed to develop the knowledge and skills to
prevent and respond to acts covered by this policy.
      (i)(l)   The school district shall provide the Department of Education
with the website address at which a copy of the policies adopted in
compliance with this section may be found.
      (j)(m)   This section is not intended to:
           (1)     Restrict a public school district from adopting and
implementing policies against bullying or school violence or policies to
promote civility and student dignity that are more inclusive than the
antibullying policies required under this section; or
           (2)     Unconstitutionally restrict protected rights of freedom of
speech, freedom of religious exercise, or freedom of assembly.;
           (3)     Affect the provisions of any collective bargaining agreement
or individual contract of employment in effect on the effective date of this
subdivision; or
           (4)     Alter or reduce the rights of a student with a disability
with regard to disciplinary actions or to general or special educational
services and supports.
      (n)(1)   Nonpublic schools are encouraged to comply with the provisions
of this section.
           (2)     In the case of a faith-based nonpublic school, no provision
of this section shall be interpreted to prohibit or abridge the legitimate
statement, expression, or free exercise of the beliefs or tenets of that
faith by the religious organization operating the school or by the school’s
faculty, staff, or student body.


      SECTION 5.   Arkansas Code Title 6, Chapter 18, Subchapter 5,is amended

                                    12             11/15/2018 4:33:02 PM TNL058
                                                                             HB1003


to add an additional section to read as follows:
      6-18-517.     School antibullying specialist — District antibullying
Coordinator.
      (a)(1)   The principal in each school in a school district shall appoint
a school antibullying specialist.
              (2)   The school antibullying specialist shall:
                    (A)   Lead the investigation of incidents of bullying in the
school; and
                    (B)   Act as the primary school official responsible for
preventing, identifying, and addressing incidents bullying in the school.
              (3)(A)   When a school guidance counselor, school psychologist, or
other individual similarly trained is currently employed in the school, the
principal shall appoint that individual to be the antibullying specialist.
                    (B)   If no individual meeting this criteria is currently
employed in the school, the principal shall appoint a school antibullying
specialist from currently employed school personnel.
      (b)(1)   The superintendent of schools shall appoint a district
antibullying coordinator.
              (2)   The district antibullying coordinator shall:
                    (A)   Be responsible for coordinating and improving the
school district's policies to prevent, identify, and address bullying of
students;
                    (B)   Collaborate with school antibullying specialists in
the district, the school district board of directors, and the superintendent
of schools to prevent, identify, and address harassment, intimidation, and
bullying of students in the district;
                    (C)   Provide data, in collaboration with the superintendent
of schools, to the Department of Education regarding bullying of students;
and
                    (D)   Execute such other duties related to school
harassment, intimidation, and bullying as requested by the superintendent of
schools.
              (3)   The superintendent shall make every effort to appoint an
employee of the school district to the position of district antibullying
coordinator.
      (c)   The district antibullying coordinator shall meet at least two (2)

                                     13             11/15/2018 4:33:02 PM TNL058
                                                                           HB1003


times each year with the school antibullying specialists in the district to
discuss and strengthen procedures and policies to prevent, identify, and
address harassment, intimidation, and bullying in the district.
     (d)(1)   The Commissioner of Education, in consultation with recognized
experts in school bullying from a cross section of academia, child advocacy
organizations, nonprofit organizations, professional associations, and
government agencies, shall establish in-service workshops and training
programs to train selected individuals to act as district antibullying
coordinators and school antibullying specialists in accordance with this
section.
            (2)   The commissioner shall seek to make the workshops and
training programs available and administered online through the Department of
Education’s website or other existing online resources.
            (3)   Upon completion of the initial in-service workshop and
training program, the commissioner shall ensure that the program reflects the
most current information on bullying in schools and is prepared and made
available to district antibullying coordinators and school antibullying
specialists at regular intervals.


     SECTION 6.   Arkansas Code Title 6, Chapter 18, Subchapter 5, is amended
to add an additional section to read as follows:
     6-18-418.    Week of Kindness — Designated.
     (a)   The week beginning with the first Monday in October of each year
is designated as the “Week of Kindness” in the State of Arkansas.
     (b)(1)   School districts, in order to recognize the importance of
character education, shall observe the week by providing age-appropriate
instruction focusing on promoting kindness and preventing bullying as defined
in § 6-18-514.
            (2)   Throughout the school year, the school district shall
provide ongoing, age-appropriate instruction on promoting kindness and
preventing bullying.




                                    14             11/15/2018 4:33:02 PM TNL058
