     Stricken language would be deleted from and underlined language would be added to present law.



State of Arkansas
92nd General Assembly                        A Bill
Regular Session, 2019                                                             HOUSE BILL 1002


By: Representative D. Douglas


                                   For An Act To Be Entitled
               AN ACT TO AMEND THE LAW CONCERNING SALES AND USE TAX;
               TO REQUIRE CERTAIN OUT-OF-STATE SELLERS TO COLLECT
               AND REMIT ARKANSAS SALES AND USE TAX; TO REPEAL THE
               SALES AND USE TAX LAW ON SELLERS AND AFFILIATED
               PERSONS; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.




                                              Subtitle
                        TO REQUIRE CERTAIN OUT-OF-STATE SELLERS
                        TO COLLECT AND REMIT ARKANSAS SALES AND
                        USE TAX.




BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF ARKANSAS:


       SECTION 1.       DO NOT CODIFY.       Legislative findings.
       The General Assembly finds that:
               (1)      The inability to effectively collect any Arkansas sales or
use tax from remote sellers who deliver tangible personal property, other
property subject to Arkansas sales and use tax, or services directly into the
state is seriously eroding the sales and use tax base of this state, causing
revenue losses and imminent harm to the state through the loss of critical
funding for state and local services;
               (2)      The harm from the loss of revenue is especially serious in
Arkansas because sales and use tax revenues are essential in funding state
and local services;
               (3)      Despite the fact that a use tax is owed on tangible personal
property, certain other property, or services delivered for use in this
state, many remote sellers actively market sales as tax-free or as



*JLL022*                                                                  11/15/2018 8:17:16 AM JLL022
                                                                            HB1002


transactions not subject to sales and use tax;
             (4)   The structural advantages of remote sellers, including the
absence of point-of-sale tax collection and the general growth of online
retail, make clear that further erosion of this state's sales and use tax
base is likely to occur in the near future;
             (5)   Remote sellers that make a substantial number of deliveries
into Arkansas or collect large gross revenues from Arkansas benefit
extensively from this state's market, economy, and infrastructure;
             (6)   In contrast with the increasing harm caused to the state by
the exemption of remote sellers from sales and use tax collection duties, the
costs of such collection have decreased because advanced computing and
software options have made it neither difficult nor burdensome for remote
sellers to collect and remit sales and use taxes associated with sales of
goods and services to residents of this state; and
             (7)   The United States Supreme Court recently upheld the ability
of states to compel out-of-state sellers with no physical presence in the
state to collect state sales and use taxes.


      SECTION 2.   Arkansas Code § 26-52-110 is repealed.
      26-52-110.   Sellers and affiliated persons — Referral agreements —
Notice required — Definitions.
      (a)   As used in this section:
             (1)   “Affiliated person” means:
                   (A)   A person that is a member of the same controlled group
of corporations as the seller; or
                   (B)   Another entity that, notwithstanding its form of
organization, bears the same ownership relationship to the seller as a
corporation that is a member of the same controlled group of corporations;
and
             (2)   “Controlled group of corporations” means the same as in 26
U.S.C. § 1563(a), as it existed on January 1, 2011.
      (b)   A seller is presumed to be engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property, specified digital products, a digital code, or
taxable services for use in the state if an affiliated person is subject to
the sales and use tax jurisdiction of the state and the:
             (1)   Seller sells a similar line of products as the affiliated

                                       2           11/15/2018 8:17:16 AM JLL022
                                                                          HB1002


person and sells the products under the same business name or a similar
business name;
             (2)   Affiliated person uses his, her, or its in-state employees
or in-state facilities to advertise, promote, or facilitate sales by the
seller to consumers;
             (3)   Affiliated person maintains an office, distribution
facility, warehouse or storage place, or similar place of business to
facilitate the delivery of property, specified digital products, a digital
code, or services sold by the seller to the seller's business;
             (4)   Affiliated person uses trademarks, service marks, or trade
names in the state that are the same or substantially similar to those used
by the seller; or
             (5)   Affiliated person delivers, installs, assembles, or performs
maintenance services for the seller's purchasers within the state.
      (c)   The presumption in subsection (b) of this section may be rebutted
by demonstrating that the affiliated person's activities in the state are not
significantly associated with the seller's ability to establish or maintain a
market in the state for the seller's sales.
      (d)(1)     If there is not an affiliated person with respect to a seller
in the state, the seller is presumed to be engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property, specified digital products, a digital code, or
taxable services for use in the state if the seller enters into an agreement
with one (1) or more residents of the state under which the residents, for a
commission or other consideration, directly or indirectly refer potential
purchasers, whether by a link on an Internet website or otherwise, to the
seller.
             (2)   However, subdivision (d)(1) of this section applies only if
the cumulative gross receipts from sales by the seller to purchasers in the
state who are referred to the seller by all residents according to the type
of agreement described in subdivision (d)(1) of this section exceed ten
thousand dollars ($10,000) during the preceding twelve (12) months.
      (e)(1)   The presumption in subsection (d) of this section may be
rebutted by submitting proof that the residents with whom the seller has an
agreement did not engage in any activity within the state that was
significantly associated with the seller's ability to establish or maintain
the seller's market in the state during the preceding twelve (12) months.

                                     3             11/15/2018 8:17:16 AM JLL022
                                                                         HB1002


            (2)   Proof provided under subdivision (e)(1) of this section may
consist of written statements from all of the residents with whom the seller
has an agreement stating that they did not engage in any solicitation in the
state on behalf of the seller during the preceding twelve (12) months if the
statements were provided and obtained in good faith.
     (f)   The Director of the Department of Finance and Administration shall
promulgate rules to implement this section.


     SECTION 3.   Arkansas Code Title 26, Chapter 52, Subchapter 1, is
amended to add an additional section to read as follows:
     26-52-111.   Collection by remote sellers.
     (a)   A seller selling tangible personal property, other property
subject to Arkansas sales and use tax, or services for delivery into Arkansas
that does not have a physical presence in this state:
            (1)   Is subject to the provisions of this chapter and the
Arkansas Compensating Tax Act of 1949, § 26-53-101 et seq.; and
            (2)   Shall remit the sales and use tax and follow all applicable
procedures and requirements of law as if the seller had a physical presence
in the state if the seller meets either of the following criteria for the
previous calendar year or the current calendar year:
                  (A)   The seller's gross revenue from the sale of tangible
personal property, other property subject to Arkansas sales and use tax, and
services for delivery into Arkansas exceeds one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000); or
                  (B)   The seller sold tangible personal property, other
property subject to Arkansas sales and use tax, or services or any
combination of tangible personal property, other property subject to Arkansas
sales and use tax, and services for delivery into Arkansas in at least two
hundred (200) separate transactions.
     (b)   The obligation to remit the sales and use tax required under this
section shall not be applied retroactively.
     (c)   A taxpayer complying with this section may seek a recovery of
taxes, penalties, or interest only by following the procedures established in
the Arkansas Tax Procedure Act, § 26-18-101 et seq.
     (d)   This section does not limit the ability of a taxpayer to obtain a
refund for any other reason, including without limitation a mistake of fact

                                    4             11/15/2018 8:17:16 AM JLL022
                                                                             HB1002


or mathematical miscalculation of the applicable tax.
     (e) A seller that remits sales and use tax under this section is not
liable to a purchaser if the seller was not required to collect sales and use
tax because a provision of this section is later deemed unlawful.
     (f)   This section does not affect the obligation of a purchaser from
this state to remit use tax on any applicable transaction in which the seller
does not collect and remit sales and use tax.
     (g)   This section does not affect or impair the:
            (1)   Obligation of a seller, when the seller is transacting
business in the state and a point-of-sale tax is collected on the
transaction, to remit all state and local taxes on any applicable transaction
in which the seller provides goods or furnishes services within the state; or
            (2)   Ability of a state entity to immediately collect the taxes
described in subdivision (g)(1) of this section.


     SECTION 4.     EFFECTIVE DATE.   Sections 1 through 3 of this act are
effective on the first day of the calendar quarter following the effective
date of this act.




                                      5             11/15/2018 8:17:16 AM JLL022
