

     SECTION 1.  The Wahiawa Hospital Association
was founded in 1944 in response to the healthcare needs of the community
following the attack on Pearl Harbor.  Several years later, Wahiawa General
Hospital, a nonprofit, community hospital was established to further meet the
growing needs of central Oahu.  Wahiawa General Hospital is centrally located
on the island of Oahu, serving the surrounding communities of central Oahu and
the north shore.  Today, the hospital is a fifty-three bed acute facility and
has one hundred seven beds in the long-term care facility that are equipped for
all levels of patient care and accredited by The Joint Commission.

     However, the hospital struggles to keep its
doors open without financial assistance from the State.  Since the regular
session of 1983, the legislature has appropriated a total of:

     (1)  $7,200,000 as a grant or subsidy for operating
costs;

     (2)  $3,750,000 in general obligation bond revenues
for capital improvement projects; and

     (3)  $84,600,000 in special purpose revenue bonds for
financing or refinancing construction projects.

Most notably during the regular session of 2016, the
legislature appropriated $2,500,000 from the general fund as a subsidy for operating
costs of the hospital.

     The legislature notes that additional
assistance has been provided to the hospital to enable it to continue to provide
medical care and services.  For over fifteen years, the hospital has attempted
to merge or affiliate with a larger healthcare system and relocate its current
acute care services to a larger service area, such as Koa Ridge, to create a
sustainable business model.  This has been the desire and goal of the past and
present boards of directors of the hospital since the late 1990s.  Recently,
the hospital attempted to form an affiliation with The Queen's Health Systems,
Hawaii Pacific Health, Castle Medical Center, and Sutter Health.  However,
after being unable to affiliate with these local providers, the hospital
management and board of directors entered into a contract with Community
Hospital Corporation from Plano, Texas.

     The Community Hospital Corporation is a
tax-exempt corporation dedicated to assisting rural hospitals in the United
States.  The corporation specializes in critical access hospitals and larger
hospitals with up to one hundred fifty beds.  The corporation owns four acute
care hospitals and provides ownership and management services to ten long-term acute
care providers.  In addition, the corporation provides a wide range of
consulting services to many hospitals on the mainland and has substantial
experience in successfully operating and turning around troubled hospitals.

     On October 21, 2016, the Wahiawa General
Hospital board of directors entered into a three-year contract with Community
Hospital Corporation to provide a benchmark based assessment of the hospital's
current operations, develop a new operating plan or business plan, and provide
a new chief executive officer and new chief financial officer.  It is important
to note that the corporation will be responsible for restructuring operations
and management services within Wahiawa General Hospital, but that this contract
does not establish an ownership agreement with the hospital.  The corporation
will have the authority and responsibility to recommend and implement changes
to the daily operations of the hospital, and the assessment and operating plan
will provide recommendations to enable the hospital to operate sustainably to
decrease state funding support.

     The legislature further finds that Wahiawa
General Hospital has acquired debt over the years.  For example, the debt owed
to the Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation, which is primarily a $6,000,000
payment-in-kind note, will most likely require restructuring at some point
during the ten-year period of the debt.  A major balloon payment is due in approximately
8.5 years.  The hospital recognizes that this issue will not be resolved for a
few years.  It should be noted that the original note to the Pension Benefit
Guarantee Corporation was negotiated down from approximately $22,000,000 to the
$6,000,000 payment-in-kind note plus a smaller fixed payment per year over ten
years.

     Furthermore, debt owed to Central Pacific Bank
was restructured in May 2015 to fully amortize the remaining balance in
approximately five years.  It should be noted that the principal owed a few
years ago was over $6,000,000 and had been reduced to below $1,000,000 as of
the end of October 2016.  The re-amortization agreement entered into in 2015
reduced the debt service payments from approximately $75,000 per month to
approximately $24,200 per month.

     The legislature further notes that a business
plan is necessary to facilitate a relocation of Wahiawa General Hospital's
medical services.  The Wahiawa General Hospital settlement agreement with
Castle and Cooke, with respect to twenty-eight acres of Castle and Cooke owned
land, does not permit banking of unused land for unspecified future use or sale
by the hospital.  The hospital needs to have a defined and approved business
plan for certain medical services before Castle and Cooke will transfer the
respective parcels of land.  Also, the hospital will need to obtain certain
permits for the development before Castle and Cooke will transfer the land to
the hospital under the settlement agreement.  The hospital has until April 2018
to develop a business plan for presentation to Castle and Cooke to transfer
twenty-eight acres to the hospital to be used for medical services.

     Accordingly, the legislature finds that it is
in the public interest to keep Wahiawa General Hospital operating to serve the
residents of central Oahu and allow the hospital to continue operations, preserve
its hospital license, reorganize, relocate, and settle its debts.

     The purpose of this Act is to authorize the
Hawaii health systems corporation to bring Wahiawa General Hospital under its
governance through formal affiliation with the corporation and to provide for
transitional facilitation by the director of health.

     SECTION 2.  Chapter 323F, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and
to read as follows:

     "§323F-    Acquisition
of Wahiawa General Hospital.  (a)  Wahiawa General Hospital on Oahu
may be assimilated into the corporation in a manner and to an extent that may
be negotiated between the corporation and Wahiawa General Hospital.  After
assimilation, the physical assets and the ground lease of Wahiawa General
Hospital shall become the property of the corporation, and Wahiawa General
Hospital shall be operated by the corporation.

     (b)  None of the liabilities of Wahiawa
General Hospital shall become liabilities of the corporation.

     (c)  The corporation, at its discretion, may
retain any or all medical and nonmedical employees of Wahiawa General Hospital.

     (d)  The corporation, without regard to
section 323F—31, may adjust the levels of services provided by Wahiawa General
Hospital.

     (e)  Wahiawa General Hospital shall be
exempt from chapter 102 and section 103—53, and its board of directors, if any,
shall be exempt from part I of chapter 92.

     (f)  The purchase of goods and services by
or on behalf of Wahiawa General Hospital shall be exempt from chapters 103D and
103F.

     (g)  Employees of Wahiawa General Hospital
shall be exempt from chapters 76, 87A, 88, and 89, and shall not be considered
as employees of the State."

     SECTION 3.  Wahiawa General Hospital;
acquisition by Hawaii health systems corporation; transitional facilitation by
the director of health.  The director of health, as an interested third
party, shall act in the role of honest broker to help facilitate the successful
acquisition of Wahiawa General Hospital by the Hawaii health systems
corporation during the transition period.  To that end, the acquisition shall
be exempt from part VII of chapter 323D, Hawaii Revised Statutes, relating to
hospital acquisition.

     SECTION 4.  There is appropriated out of the
general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of
$           or so much
thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2017-2018 to carry out the purposes
of this Act, including the hiring of necessary staff.

     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the
department of health for the purposes of this Act.

     SECTION 5.  New statutory material is
underscored.

     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect upon its
approval; provided that section 4 shall take effect on July 1, 2017, and
section 3 shall be repealed upon:

     (1)  The receipt of a letter by the director of health
from the board of directors of the Hawaii health systems corporation officially
notifying the director of health that the acquisition of Wahiawa General
Hospital by the corporation has been successfully completed; and

     (2)  The issuance of a proclamation by the governor
that the events in paragraph (1) have occurred.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


