

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that properly
licensed school psychologists provide effective services to help children and
youth succeed academically, socially, behaviorally, and emotionally by
providing direct educational and mental health services for children and youth,
as well as working with parents, educators, and other professionals to create
supportive learning and social environments for all children.

     Currently, Hawaii is the only state without
certification of licensure for school psychologists.  Without orderly
licensing, the State cannot ensure that functioning school psychologists are
properly qualified and delivering appropriate services.  In addition, the
State's failure to properly license school psychologists means that by law the
State is unable to seek warranted reimbursements from the federal medicaid
program for the use of school psychologists in an educational setting. 
Consequently, it is necessary to establish a licensure program to ensure the
employment of qualified school psychologists and to allow schools utilizing
school psychologists to properly seek available federal medicaid funds.

     The legislature further finds that a proper
licensing program requires establishing meaningful criteria and guidelines for
the licensure of school psychologists.  The National Association of School Psychologists'
Standards for the Credentialing of School Psychologists provides a model upon
which these guidelines may in part be based.  The National Association of
School Psychologists' Standards create a set of national standards that can
serve to regulate the credentialing of school psychologists.  School
psychologists who hold a National Association of School Psychologists
credential have met these national standards.

     Accordingly, the purpose of this Act is to
establish the recommended criteria for the licensure of school psychologists,
including graduate coursework, practica, and internship requirements based in
part on the National Association of School Psychologists' Standards.  The
legislature finds that accredited school psychologists should be licensed by
and register with the board of psychology to ensure the continued delivery of
quality service to students and the community.

     SECTION 2.  Chapter 465, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended by adding a new part to be appropriately designated and to
read as follows:

"Part    .  School Psychologists

     §465-A  Definitions.  As used in this part:

     "Accredited educational institution"
means a university or college accredited by the Western Association of Schools
and Colleges or a comparable regional body.

     "Board" means the board of
psychology.

     "Practice of school psychology" means
the application of principles, methods, and procedures of measurement,
prediction, evaluation, testing, counseling, consultation, and instruction
related to and consistent with the national standards articulated by the most
current Model for Comprehensive and Integrated School Psychological Services as
published by the National Association of School Psychologists or its successor
in a school setting.  "Practice of school psychology" does not
include private practice.

     "School psychologist" means a
professional licensed by the board as a school psychologist who provides school
psychological services consistent with the national standards articulated by
the most current Model for Comprehensive and Integrated School Psychological
Services as published by the National Association of School Psychologists or
its successor.  "School psychologist" includes a school
psychologist-doctoral and a school psychologist-specialist.

     §465-B  School psychologist; qualifications. 
No applicant shall be licensed to engage in the practice of school psychology
unless the applicant meets the following requirements:

     (1)  A master's-level degree, specialist-level degree,
or doctoral degree from an organized program of study in school psychology
within an accredited educational institution comprising a minimum of sixty
semester hours in the following course areas:  data collection and analysis,
assessment, progress monitoring, school-wide practices to promote learning,
resilience and risk factors, consultation and collaboration, academic or
learning interventions, mental health interventions, behavioral interventions,
instructional support, prevention and intervention services, special education
services, crisis preparedness, response and recovery, family-school-community
collaboration, diversity in development and learning, research and program
evaluation and professional ethics, school law and systems; and

         (A)  Has completed one thousand two hundred
hours of supervised internship in school psychology with no less than six
hundred hours completed within a school setting; and

         (B)  Has passed the School Psychology Praxis
examination with a minimum score of one hundred forty-seven or the most current
standard of the National Association of School Psychologists; or

     (2)  A current, unencumbered certification as a
nationally certified school psychologist or a valid license or credential in
school psychology in another state or United States territory prior to July 1,
2018; provided that for those employed as a school psychologist in Hawaii as of
July 1, 2018, an out of state license or credential that has been expired for
no more than ten years from July 1, 2018, will also be accepted.

     Before any applicant shall be eligible for licensure
under this part, the applicant shall file an application in a form as shall be
prescribed by the board and pay to the board an application fee and all other
applicable fees.

     §465-C  Description of services.  A
person practices as a school psychologist if the person delivers services to
children and students from birth through college who are eligible to be
enrolled in educational and intermediate educational units, special education
programs, universities and colleges, early intervention programs, developmental
centers, and approved private schools.  School psychologists are limited to
practicing within school settings and licensure does not allow for private
practice.

     §465-D  Practice of school psychology;
license required; registration required.  (a)  No person shall represent,
announce, or advertise oneself, publicly or privately, as a school psychologist
or affix any other words, letters, abbreviations, or insignia to the person's
name indicating or implying that the person is engaged in the practice of
school psychology, without having first obtained a license as provided in this
part.

     (b)  A person may use the title of school
psychologist provided that the person:

     (1)  Registers the person's name and business address
biennially with the board in a manner prescribed by the board; and

     (2)  Meets the qualifications of section 465-B.

     (c)  The board shall maintain and biennially
update a list of the names and business addresses of the school psychologists
who are registered pursuant to subsection (b).

     §465-E  Advising the board of psychology. 
The board shall receive advice and review proposals from the Hawaii Association
of School Psychologists regarding issues relating to school psychologists and
the practice of school psychology."

     SECTION 3.  Chapter 465, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended by designating sections 465-1 to 465-15, as part I and
inserting a title before section 465-1, to read as follows:

"Part I.  General Provisions"

     SECTION 4.  Section 465-4, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended to read as follows:

     "§465-4  Board of psychology;
appointment, qualifications, term, expenses.  There is created a board of
psychology consisting of [seven] nine members.  There shall be
five members representing varied specialties of the profession, each of whom
shall be licensed to practice psychology under this chapter and have a minimum
of five years of post-doctoral professional experience, two members who are
licensed to practice school psychology under this chapter, and two lay
members from the community at large.  A lay member shall not be a psychologist,
an applicant, or former applicant for licensure as a psychologist."

     SECTION 5.  This Act does not affect rights and
duties that matured, penalties that were incurred, and proceedings that were
begun before its effective date.

     SECTION 6.  In codifying the new sections added
by section 2 of this Act, the revisor of statutes shall substitute appropriate
section numbers for the letters used in designating the new sections in this
Act.

     SECTION 7.  Statutory material to be repealed
is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.

     SECTION 8.  This Act shall take effect on July
1, 2017.

 

