

PART I

     SECTION 1.  Section 235-16.5, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended to read as follows:

     "§235-16.5  Cesspool upgrade,
conversion, or connection; income tax credit.  (a)  There shall be allowed
to each taxpayer subject to the tax imposed under this chapter, a cesspool
upgrade, conversion, or connection income tax credit that shall be deductible
from the taxpayer's net income tax liability, if any, imposed by this chapter
for the taxable year in which the credit is properly claimed.  A taxpayer
eligible to claim a tax credit under this section may assign all or a portion
of a tax credit under this section to any assignee.  An assignee may
subsequently assign a tax credit or any portion of a tax credit assigned under
this subsection to one or more assignees.  A taxpayer may claim a portion of a
tax credit and assign the remaining tax credit amount.  A tax credit assignment
under this subsection shall be irrevocable.  The tax credit assignment under
this subsection shall be made on a form prescribed by the department of
taxation.  A taxpayer claiming a tax credit under this section shall submit a
copy of the completed assignment form to the department in the tax year in
which the assignment is made and shall attach a copy of the form to the tax
return on which the tax credit is claimed.

     (b)  In the case of a partnership, S
corporation, estate, or trust, the tax credit allowable is for qualified
expenses incurred by the entity for the taxable year.  The expenses upon which
the tax credit is computed shall be determined at the entity level. 
Distribution and share of credit shall be determined by rule.

     If a taxpayer is awarded a grant under
section 342D-B, no tax credit shall be allowed for that portion of qualified
expenses paid for by grant moneys.

     (c)  The cesspool upgrade, conversion, or
connection income tax credit shall be equal to the qualified expenses of the
taxpayer, up to a maximum of $10,000; provided that, in the case of a qualified
cesspool that is a residential large capacity cesspool, the amount of the
credit shall be equal to the qualified expenses of the taxpayer, up to a
maximum of $10,000 per residential dwelling connected to the cesspool, as
certified by the department of health pursuant to subsection (e).  There shall
be allowed a maximum of one cesspool upgrade, conversion, or connection income
tax credit per qualified cesspool or per tax map key number where more than one
residence is connected to a residential large-capacity cesspool.  The cesspool
upgrade, conversion, or connection income tax credit shall be available only
for the taxable year in which the taxpayer's qualified expenses are certified
by the appropriate government agency.

     (d)  The total amount of tax credits allowed
under this section shall not exceed $5,000,000 for all taxpayers in any taxable
year; provided that any taxpayer who is not eligible to claim the credit in a
taxable year due to the $5,000,000 cap having been exceeded for that taxable
year shall be eligible to claim the credit in the subsequent taxable year.

     (e)  The department of health shall:

     (1)  Certify all qualified cesspools for the purposes
of this section; provided that, as a pilot program, the department of health,
in its discretion, may certify no more than two residential large capacity
cesspools as qualified cesspools;

     (2)  Collect and maintain a record of all qualified
expenses certified by an appropriate government agency for the taxable year;
and

     (3)  Certify to each taxpayer the amount of credit the
taxpayer may claim; provided that if, in any year, the annual amount of certified
credits reaches $5,000,000 in the aggregate, the department of health shall
immediately discontinue certifying credits and notify the department of
taxation.

The director of health may adopt rules under chapter
91 as necessary to implement the certification requirements under this section.

     (f)  The director of taxation:

     (1)  Shall prepare any forms that may be necessary to
claim a tax credit under this section;

     (2)  May require the taxpayer to furnish reasonable
information to ascertain the validity of the claim for the tax credit made under
this section; and

     (3)  May adopt rules under chapter 91 necessary to
effectuate the purposes of this section.

    (g)  If the tax credit under this section
exceeds the taxpayer's income tax liability, the excess of the credit over
liability [may be used as a credit against the taxpayer's income tax
liability in subsequent years until exhausted.] shall be refunded to the
taxpayer; provided that tax credits properly claimed by an individual who has
no income tax liability shall be paid to the individual; and provided further
that no refunds or payment on account of the tax credits allowed by this
section shall be made for amounts less than $1.  All claims for the tax
credit under this section, including amended claims, shall be filed on or
before the end of the twelfth month following the close of the taxable year for
which the credit may be claimed.  Failure to comply with the foregoing
provision shall constitute a waiver of the right to claim the credit.

    (h)  This section shall not apply to taxable
years beginning after December 31, [2020.] 2022.

     (i)  The tax credit under this section shall
not be available to the following:

     (1)  A taxpayer filing a single return or a
married person filing separately with a federal adjusted gross income of $          or
more;

     (2)  A taxpayer filing as a head of
household with a federal adjusted gross income of $          or more; or

     (3)  A taxpayer filing a joint return or as
a surviving spouse with a federal adjusted gross income of $          or
more.

     [(i)] (j)  As used in this
section:

     "Aerobic treatment unit system" means
an individual wastewater system that consists of an aerobic treatment unit
tank, aeration device, piping, and a discharge method that is in accordance
with rules adopted by the department of health relating to household aerobic
units.

     "Cesspool" means an individual
wastewater system consisting of an excavation in the ground whose depth is
greater than its widest surface dimension, which receives untreated wastewater,
and retains or is designed to retain the organic matter and solids discharged
into it, but permits the liquid to seep through its bottom or sides to gain
access to the underground geographic formation.

     "Qualified cesspool" means a cesspool
that is certified by the department of health as [being]:

     (1)  [Located] Being located within:

         (A)  Two hundred feet of a shoreline, perennial
stream, or wetland; or

         (B)  A source water assessment program area
(two year time of travel from a cesspool to a public drinking water source); [or]

     (2)  [A] Being a residential large
capacity cesspool[.]; or

     (3)  Having been shown to impact drinking
water supplies or recreational waters.

     "Qualified expenses" means costs that
are necessary and directly incurred by the taxpayer for upgrading or converting
a qualified cesspool into a septic system or an aerobic treatment unit system,
or connecting a qualified cesspool to a sewer system, and that are certified as
such by the appropriate government agency.

     "Residential large capacity cesspool"
means a cesspool that is connected to more than one residential dwelling.

     "Septic system" means an individual
wastewater system that typically consists of a septic tank, piping, and a
drainage field where there is natural biological decontamination as wastewater
discharged into the system is filtered through soil.

     "Sewer system" means a system of
piping, with appurtenances, for collecting and conveying wastewater from source
to discharge following treatment.

     "Wastewater" means any liquid waste,
whether or not treated and whether animal, mineral, or vegetable, including
agricultural, industrial, and thermal wastes."

     SECTION 2.  Act 120, Session Laws of Hawaii
2015, is amended by amending section 4 to read as follows:

     "SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on
July 1, 2015, and shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31,
2015; provided that this Act shall be repealed on December 31, [2020.] 2022."

PART II

     SECTION 3.  Chapter 342D, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended by adding two new sections to part IV to be appropriately
designated and to read as follows:

     "§342D-A  Cesspools; mandatory
upgrade, conversion, or connection.  (a)  Prior to January 1, 2050, every
cesspool in the State shall be:

     (1)  Upgraded or converted to a septic
system or aerobic treatment unit system; or

     (2)  Connected to a sewerage system.

     (b)  As used in this section:

     "Aerobic treatment unit system"
means an individual wastewater system that consists of an aerobic treatment
unit tank, aeration device, piping, and a discharge method that is in
accordance with rules adopted by the department relating to household aerobic
units.

     "Cesspool" means an individual
wastewater system consisting of an excavation in the ground whose depth is
greater than its widest surface dimension, which receives untreated wastewater,
and retains or is designed to retain the organic matter and solids discharged
into it, but permits the liquid to seep through its bottom or sides to gain
access to the underground geographic formation.

     "Septic system" means an
individual wastewater system that typically consists of a septic tank, piping,
and a drainage field where there is natural biological decontamination as
wastewater discharged into the system is filtered through soil.

     §342D-B  Cesspool compliance grant
program.  (a)  There is established in the department the cesspool
compliance grant program to assist homeowners in meeting the costs of:

     (1)  Upgrading or converting a cesspool to a
septic system or aerobic treatment unit system; or

     (2)  Connecting a cesspool to a sewerage
system,

in compliance with section 342D-A.

     (b)  No grant under this section shall be
awarded to a person whose income level exceeds those described in section
235-16.5(i).

     (c)  The department shall adopt rules to
carry out the purposes of the grant program."

     SECTION 4.  There is appropriated out of the
general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $          or so much
thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2017-2018 for deposit into the water
pollution control revolving fund.

     SECTION 5.  There is appropriated out of the water
pollution control revolving fund the sum of $          or so much thereof as
may be necessary for fiscal year 2017-2018 to implement the cesspool compliance
grant program.

     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department
of health for the purposes of this Act.

PART III

     SECTION 6. 
Chapter 342D, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to
part I to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:

     "§342D-C  Cesspools;
mandatory disclosure; guidelines.  The department shall develop
guidelines to determine the circumstances under which the disclosure of the
existence of a cesspool, prior to the sale or transfer of the real property
where the cesspool is located, shall be mandatory."

     SECTION 7.  Chapter 508D, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and
to read as follows:

     "§508D-     Cesspools;
material fact; disclosure.  If the disclosure of the existence of a
cesspool on real property subject to this chapter is determined to be mandatory
under guidelines developed by the department of health under section 342D-C, the
existence of the cesspool shall be considered a material fact and shall be
included in a seller's disclosure statement."

PART IV

     SECTION 8.  In codifying the new sections added
by sections 3 and 6 of this Act, the revisor of statutes shall substitute
appropriate section numbers for the letters used in designating the new
sections in this Act.

     SECTION 9.  This Act does not affect rights and
duties that matured, penalties that were incurred, and proceedings that were
begun before its effective date.

     SECTION 10.  Statutory material to be repealed
is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.

     SECTION 11.  This Act shall take effect upon its
approval; provided that:

     (1)  Section 1 shall apply to taxable years beginning
after December 31, 2016; and

     (2)  Sections 4 and 5 shall take effect on July 1,
2017.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


