

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that Hawaii's
lobbyist registration law is both under- and over-inclusive, such that amending
the definitions of "expenditures", "lobbying", and
"lobbyist" will provide additional transparency to the public while
relieving some individuals, particularly certain representatives of charitable,
nonprofit organizations, from having to register as lobbyists.  Similarly, the
legislature finds that several provisions of the lobbyists law should be
amended to avoid unnecessary paperwork and confusion.  Among other things, the
legislature finds that the employer of a lobbyist should have the authority to
terminate that lobbyist's registration if the lobbyist does not do so on their
own.

     Accordingly, the purpose of this Act is to
provide additional clarity and consistency in the administration and
enforcement of Hawaii’s lobbying laws.

     SECTION 2.  Section 97-1, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended to read as follows:

     "§97-1  Definitions.  When used in
this chapter:

    [(1)] "Administrative action" means
the proposal, drafting, consideration, amendment, enactment, or defeat by any
administrative agency of any rule, regulation, or other action governed by
section 91-3.

    [(2)] "Administrative agency" means a
commission, board, agency, or other body, or official in the state government
that is not a part of the legislative or judicial branch.

    [(3)] "Contribution" includes a gift,
subscription, forgiveness of a loan, advance, or deposit of money, or anything
of value and includes a contract, promise, or agreement, whether or not enforceable,
to make a contribution.

    [(4)] "Expenditure" includes a
payment, distribution, forgiveness of a loan, advance, deposit, or gift of
money, or anything of value and includes a contract, promise, or agreement,
whether or not enforceable, to make an expenditure.  "Expenditure"
also includes compensation or other consideration paid to a lobbyist for the
performance of lobbying services.  "Expenditure" excludes [the
expenses of preparing written testimony and exhibits for a hearing before the
legislature or an administrative agency.] any amounts expended:

(1)  For
intrastate travel costs, including incidental meals and lodging, provided that
this exception does not apply to any amounts expended for the travel costs of
state legislators, board and commission members, or any other employees of the
State; or

          (2)
 By a nonprofit organization to prepare and submit an application for a
grant pursuant to chapter 42F, and for each of the nonprofit organization’s
employees to lobby a maximum of ten hours in a month for that application.

    [(5)] "Legislative action" means the
sponsorship, drafting, introduction, consideration, modification, enactment, or
defeat of any bill, resolution, amendment, report, nomination, appointment, or
any other matter pending or proposed in the legislature.

          "Lobbying" means communicating
directly or through an agent, or soliciting others to communicate, with any
official in the legislative or executive branch, for the purpose of attempting
to influence legislative or administrative action or a ballot issue.  "Lobbying"
shall not include the preparation and submission of a grant application
pursuant to chapter 42F by a representative of a nonprofit organization.

    [(6)] "Lobbyist" means any individual
who [for]: 

     (1)  Receives or expects to receive, either
by employment or contract, more than $1,000 in monetary or in-kind compensation
in any calendar year for engaging in lobbying, either personally or through the
lobbyist's agents; or

     (2)  For pay or other consideration [engages],
on behalf of another person: 

         (A)  Engages in lobbying in
excess of five hours in any month of any reporting period described in section
97-3 [or spends];

         (B)  Engages in lobbying in excess of
ten hours during any calendar year;

         (C)  Engages in lobbying on three or
more bills, resolutions, or both, during any legislative session; or

         (D)  Makes expenditures of more
than [$750] $1,000 of the person's or any other person's money
lobbying during any reporting period described in section 97-3[.];

          provided that an employee of a nonprofit
organization who spends fewer than ten hours in any month lobbying on a grant
application submitted pursuant to chapter 42F is not a lobbyist if the employee
does not lobby on matters that are unrelated to the grant application.

    [(7)  "Lobbying" means
communicating directly or through an agent, or soliciting others to
communicate, with any official in the legislative or executive branch, for the
purpose of attempting to influence legislative or administrative action or a
ballot issue.]

    [(8)] "Person" means a corporation,
individual, union, association, firm, sole proprietorship, partnership,
committee, club, or any other organization or a representative of a group of
persons acting in concert."

     SECTION 3.  Section 97-2, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended by amending subsections (d) and (e) to read as follows:

     "(d)  A lobbyist shall file a notice of
termination within ten days after the lobbyist ceases the activity which
required the lobbyist's registration.  If the lobbyist fails to file a
notice of termination, the person who employed or contracted for the services
of the lobbyist may file the notice.  The lobbyist and the [employer]
person who employed or contracted for the services of the lobbyist shall
remain subject, however, to the requirements of this chapter [97]
for the period during which the registration was effective.

     (e)  This chapter shall not apply to:

     (1)  Any individual who represents oneself and not any
other person before the legislature or administrative agency; provided that [such]
the individual [must nonetheless] shall file a
statement of expenditures if the individual meets any of the provisions of
section 97-3(a);

     (2)  Any federal, state, or county official or
employee acting in the official's or employee's official capacity, unless the
federal, state or county official, or employee contracts for the services of a
lobbyist;

     (3)  Any elected public official acting in the public
official's official capacity, unless the public official contracts for the
services of a lobbyist;

     (4)  Any newspaper or other regularly published
periodical or radio or television station (including any individual who owns,
publishes, or is employed by a newspaper or periodical or radio or television
station) while publishing in the regular course of business news items,
editorials, or other comments, or paid advertisements, which directly or
indirectly urge the passage or defeat of legislative or administrative action;

     (5)  Any attorney who advises the attorney's clients
on the construction or effect of proposed legislative or administrative action;
provided that such attorney must nonetheless register if the attorney meets [any
of the provisions of section 97-1(6);] the definition of
"lobbyist" as defined in section 97-1; and

     (6)  Any person who possesses special skills and
knowledge relevant to certain areas of legislation, whose skills and knowledge
may be helpful to the legislative and executive branches of state government,
and who makes an occasional appearance at the request of the legislature or an
administrative agency, or the lobbyist even though receiving reimbursement or
other payment from the legislature or administrative agency or the lobbyist for
the appearance."

     SECTION 4.  Section 97-3, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended by amending subsections (a), (b), and (c) to read as
follows:

     "(a)  The following persons shall file a
statement of expenditures with the state ethics commission on March 31,
May 31, and January 31 of each year and within thirty days after
adjournment sine die of any special session of the legislature:

     (1)  Each lobbyist;

     (2)  Each person who [spends $750] makes
expenditures of $1,000 or more of the person's or any other person's money
in any [six-month period] reporting period described in this section
for the purpose of [attempting to influence legislative or administrative
action or a ballot issue by communicating or urging others to communicate with
public officials; provided that any amounts expended for travel costs,
including incidental meals and lodging, shall not be included in the tallying
of the $750;] lobbying; and

     (3)  Each person who employs or contracts for the
services of one or more lobbyists, whether independently or jointly with other
persons.  If the person is an industry, trade, or professional association,
only the association is the employer of the lobbyist.

     (b)  The March 31 report shall cover the
period from January 1 through the last day of February.  The May 31 report
shall cover the period from March 1 through April 30.  The January 31
report shall cover the period from May 1 through December 31 of the
previous year.  The report to be filed within thirty days after adjournment
sine die of a special session of the legislature shall [cover]: 

     (1)  Cover the period from May 1 through
adjournment sine die of that special session [and shall apply];

     (2)  Be filed only by persons listed in
subsection (a) who engage in lobbying activities, or who make expenditures for
the purpose of attempting to influence legislative action considered during a
special session; and

     (3)  Apply to and include only those
expenditures and contributions that relate to legislative action considered
during that special session[.]; 

provided that those expenditures and
contributions included in the report need not be included by the person filing
the report in any subsequent statement of expenditures.

     (c)  The statement shall contain the following
information:

     (1)  The name and address of each person with respect
to whom expenditures for the purpose of lobbying in the total sum of $25 or
more per day was made by the person filing the statement during the statement
period and the amount or value of [such] the expenditure;

     (2)  The name and address of each person with respect
to whom expenditures for the purpose of lobbying in the aggregate of $150 or
more was made by the person filing the statement during the statement period
and the amount or value of [such] the expenditures;

     (3)  The total sum or value of all expenditures for
the purpose of lobbying made by the person filing the statement during the
statement [period in excess of $750 during the statement] period;
provided that the sum or value of each expenditure is itemized in the following
categories, as applicable:

         (A)  Preparation and distribution of lobbying
materials;

         (B)  Media advertising;

         (C)  Compensation paid to lobbyists;

         (D)  Fees paid to consultants [or] for
services;

         (E)  Entertainment and events;

         (F)  Receptions, meals, food, and beverages;

         (G)  Gifts;

         (H)  Loans; [and]

         (I)  Interstate transportation, including
incidental meals and lodging; and

         (J)  Other disbursements;

     (4)  The name and address of each person making
contributions to the person filing the statement for the purpose of lobbying in
the total sum of $25 or more during the statement period and the amount or
value of [such] the contributions; and

     (5)  The subject area of the legislative and
administrative action which was supported or opposed by the person filing the
statement during the statement period."

     SECTION 5.  Section 97-4.5, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended to read as follows:

     "[[]§97-4.5[]]  Lobbyist
list.  [As soon as is feasible after the commencement of each regular
session of the legislature, the state ethics commission shall publish a list of
registered lobbyists, the names of the persons whom they represent, and other
pertinent information but shall not include in such list the addresses of the
lobbyists.  The list shall be supplemented from time to time as may be
necessary.]  All lobbyist registration statements shall be posted on the
state ethics commission's website within a reasonable time after filing, and
may be removed from the website after four years."

     SECTION 6.  The state ethics commission, in its
discretion, may make any changes that it deems necessary to internal procedures
or forms to aid in the implementation of this Act.

     SECTION 7.  If any provision of this Act, or
the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the Act that can
be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end
the provisions of this Act are severable.

     SECTION 8.  This Act does not affect rights and
duties that matured, penalties that were incurred, and proceedings that were
begun before its effective date.

     SECTION 9.  Statutory material to be repealed
is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.

     SECTION 10.  This Act shall take effect upon
its approval.

