

SECTION 1. 
Section 92-2.5, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:

     "ยง92-2.5  Permitted interactions of
members.  (a)  Two members of a board may discuss between themselves
matters relating to official board business to enable
them to perform their duties faithfully, as long as no commitment to vote is
made or sought and the two members do not constitute a quorum of their board.

     (b)  Two or more members of a board, but less
than the number of members [which] that would constitute a quorum
for the board, may be assigned to:

     (1)  Investigate a matter relating to the official
business of their board; provided that:

         (A)  The scope of the investigation and the
scope of each member's authority are defined at a meeting of the board;

         (B)  All resulting findings and recommendations
are presented to the board at a meeting of the board; and

         (C)  Deliberation and decisionmaking on the
matter investigated, if any, occurs only at a duly noticed meeting of the board
held subsequent to the meeting at which the findings and recommendations of the
investigation were presented to the board; or

     (2)  Present, discuss, or negotiate any position [which]
that the board has adopted at a meeting of the board; provided that the
assignment is made and the scope of each member's authority is defined at a
meeting of the board prior to the presentation, discussion, or negotiation.

     (c)  Discussions between two or more members of
a board, but less than the number of members which would constitute a quorum
for the board, concerning the selection of the board's officers may be conducted
in private without limitation or subsequent reporting.

     (d)  Board members present at a meeting that
must be canceled for lack of quorum or terminated pursuant to section 92-3.5(c)
may nonetheless receive testimony and presentations on items on the agenda and
question the testifiers or presenters; provided that:

     (1)  Deliberation or decisionmaking on any item, for
which testimony or presentations are received, occurs only at a duly noticed
meeting of the board held subsequent to the meeting at which the testimony and
presentations were received;

     (2)  The members present shall create a record of the
oral testimony or presentations in the same manner as would be required by
section 92-9 for testimony or presentations heard during a meeting of the
board; and

     (3)  Before its deliberation or decisionmaking at a
subsequent meeting, the board shall:

         (A)  Provide copies of the testimony and
presentations received at the canceled meeting to all members of the board; and

         (B)  Receive a report by the members who were
present at the canceled or terminated meeting about the testimony and
presentations received.

     (e)  Two or more members of a board, but less
than the number of members [which] that would constitute a quorum
for the board, may attend an informational meeting or presentation on matters
relating to official board business, including a meeting of another entity,
legislative hearing, convention, seminar, or community meeting; provided that
the meeting or presentation is not specifically and exclusively organized for
or directed toward members of the board.  The board members in attendance may
participate in discussions, including discussions among themselves; provided
that the discussions occur during and as part of the informational meeting or
presentation; and provided further that no commitment relating to a vote on the
matter is made or sought.

     At the next duly noticed meeting of the board,
the board members shall report their attendance and the matters presented and
discussed that related to official board business at the informational meeting
or presentation.

    (f)  Discussions between the governor and one or
more members of a board may be conducted in private without limitation or
subsequent reporting; provided that the discussion does not relate to a matter
over which a board is exercising its adjudicatory function.

    (g)  Discussions between two or more members of
a board and the head of a department to which the board is administratively
assigned may be conducted in private without limitation; provided that the
discussion is limited to matters specified in section 26-35.

     (h)  A member of a board may provide, by
memorandum or other means of transmittal, other members of the board any
government record for which disclosure is required by section 92F-12; provided
that:

     (1)  No commitment relating to a vote on the
matter is made or sought by the board member in the means of transmittal; and

     (2)  No additional discussion other than a
statement describing the government record and the issue related to the government
record shall be included in the transmittal.

     [(h)] (i)  Communications,
interactions, discussions, investigations, and presentations described in this
section are not meetings for purposes of this part." 

     SECTION 2.  Section 279D-9, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is
amended by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:

     "(b)  Participation by members of any
other board in a meeting of a policy board shall be permitted interaction as
provided in section [92-2.5(h).] 92-2.5(i)."

     SECTION 3.  Statutory material to be repealed
is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.

     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its
approval.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
  By Request
  
 


