

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that every
year laws are enacted that require new studies and audits of various state
government departments or agencies.  Conducting and completing many of these
studies and audits require an appropriation and also consume valuable time and
resources of the department, agency, office, or branch of government tasked
with preparing the study or audit.  The legislature also finds that the
resultant report is often not widely reviewed by the legislature or public and
can sometimes go completely unnoticed despite the fact that these reports can
contain valuable information.  The legislature further finds that mandating a
public hearing or informational briefing which would facilitate discussion and
analysis of the report findings and recommendations would better serve the
public interest.

     The purpose of this Act is to require a public
hearing or informational briefing on certain audit reports and studies enacted
with an appropriation within one year of the receipt of the report or study in
order to properly review and consider the information provided therein.

     SECTION 2.  Chapter 21, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended by adding a new part to be appropriately designated and to
read as follows:

"Part    .  HEARINGS or briefings
ON REPORTS

     ยง21-    Procedures for consideration
of reports.  (a)  For any study or audit enacted with a legislative
appropriation to fund the study or audit, including those studies or audits in
any budget measure, and which are conducted by:

     (1)  The executive departments and agencies, including
the Hawaii health systems corporation;

     (2)  The auditor;

     (3)  The judiciary;

     (4)  The legislative reference bureau; or

     (5)  The Office of Hawaiian Affairs,

the state agency completing the study or audit shall
submit the report to the chair of the applicable subject matter committee of
each chamber and if no chair is currently appointed to such committee, then to
the presiding officer of that chamber.  The report shall also be in compliance with
the requirements of section 93-16.

     (b)  The respective chairs of the committees to
whom a report is submitted under subsection (a) shall conduct a public hearing
or informational briefing on the report within one year of the chair receiving
the report.  Upon request of the chair, a one-year extension of time or waiver
of the requirement to conduct a public hearing or informational briefing may be
granted by the president of the senate or the speaker of the house of representatives,
as appropriate; provided that the reasons for the granting a one-year extension
of time or waiver of the requirement under this part shall be posted on the
legislature's website and publicly noticed at the capital."

     SECTION 3.  Chapter 21, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended by designating sections 21-1 to 21-19 as part I, entitled
"Investigating Committees".

     SECTION 4.  Sections 21-1, 21-2, 21-6, 21-13,
21-15, and 21-19, Hawaii Revised Statutes, are amended by substituting the word
"part" wherever the word "chapter" appears, as the context
requires.

     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its
approval.

 

