

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that due to
its lightweight nature and ability to break down into smaller fragments that
persist for decades, polystyrene has significant negative impacts on the
environment, contributes to the potential death of marine animals and avian
populations through ingestion, and is a suspected human carcinogen.

     The purpose of this Act is to prohibit the use
of polystyrene food containers in state-owned and state-run buildings and facilities
and require that food be packed in compostable containers.

     SECTION 2.  The Hawaii Revised Statutes is
amended by adding a new chapter to be appropriately designated and to read as
follows:

"Chapter

Food service containers

     ยง   -1  Definitions.  As used in
this chapter:

     "Compostable" means materials that
are able to undergo biological decomposition or become part of a usable compost
in a safe and timely manner, either in an appropriate composting program or
facility or in a home compost pile or device.  To qualify as compostable, the
materials must meet ASTM Standard D6400 for compostable plastics, as amended.

     "Department" means the department of
health.

     "Disposable food service container"
means a disposable product used by a restaurant or food establishment as
packaging to serve or transport prepared, ready-to-consume food or beverages,
including but not limited to plates, cups, bowls, trays, and hinged or lidded
containers.  "Disposable food service container" does not include
single-use disposable straws or utensils.

     "Polystyrene" means a thermoplastic
petrochemical material utilizing a styrene monomer, including all polystyrene,
meaning any styrene or vinyl chloride polymer that is blown into a foam-like
material.  Polystyrene includes materials created from techniques including the
fusion of polymer spheres (expandable bead polystyrene), injection molding,
foam molding, and extrusion-blow molding (extruded foam polystyrene).

     "Polystyrene foam container" means a
container that is made using polystyrene material.

     "Prepared food" means food or
beverages that are prepared to be consumed on or off the premises of a
restaurant or food establishment.

     "Undue hardship" includes but is not
limited to situations in which:

     (1)  There are no acceptable alternatives to packaging
with polystyrene foam containers for reasons that are unique to the applicant;
or

     (2)  Compliance with the prohibition would deprive a
person of a legally protected right.

     ยง   -2  Prohibition on the use of
polystyrene foam containers; exemptions.  (a)  Beginning on January 1,
2018, no restaurant or food establishment operating within any state-owned or
state-run building or facility shall serve prepared food using polystyrene foam
containers.

     (b)  Beginning on January 1, 2018, any
restaurant or food establishment operating within any state-owned or state-run building
or facility shall use disposable food service containers made of compostable
material. 

     (c)  The department may grant an exemption from
the requirements of this section upon application and a showing by the
applicant that compliance would cause undue hardship.  

     ยง   -3  Rules.  The department shall
adopt rules pursuant to chapter 91 necessary to implement this chapter,
including rules relating to enforcement and exemptions."

     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its
approval.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


