

     SECTION
1.  The legislature finds that there has been a recent trend in Hawaii toward increased mail-in voting.  The
2014 Hawaii primary election was the first election in which more ballots were cast early than were cast on primary election day.  Fifty-six per
cent of Hawaii voters chose to vote early during the 2014 primary, with
approximately eighty-three per cent of these early voters doing so by mail-in
absentee ballot.

     The
legislature further finds that Hawaii's conversion to elections by mail would
significantly reduce the logistical issues related to conducting elections.  The
legislature concludes that an incremental implementation of an election by mail
voting system is the best approach for the State to transition to elections by
mail.  The legislature intends that late
registration remain available in an election by mail.

     Accordingly,
the purpose of this Act is to:

     (1)  Require the office of elections to
implement elections by mail in a county with a population of less than 100,000,
beginning with the 2018 primary election, and beginning with the 2020 primary
election, implement elections by mail in every county for all federal, state,
and county primary, special primary, general, special general, and special
elections;

     (2)  Provide places of deposit for personal
delivery of mail-in ballots and a limited number of voter service centers that
would remain open on the day of election to receive personal delivery of
absentee, permanent absentee, and mail-in ballots, accommodate voters with
special needs, and provide other services; and

     (3)  Appropriate funds for the implementation
and administration of the election by mail program.

     SECTION
2.  Chapter 11, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new part to be
appropriately designated and to read as follows:

"Part
   .  ELECTIONS BY MAIL

     §11-A 
Elections eligible to be conducted by mail. 
Beginning with the 2018 primary election, the office of elections shall
implement elections by mail in a county with a population of less than
100,000.  Beginning with the 2020 primary election, the office of elections
shall implement elections by mail for all federal, state, and county primary,
special primary, general, special general, and special elections throughout the
State in accordance with this part; provided that any person registered to vote
in a county that has not yet implemented elections by mail under this part may
request an absentee ballot or permanent absentee ballot in accordance with
section 15-4, in lieu of receiving an election by mail ballot package pursuant
to this part, and absentee ballot-only elections may continue to be conducted
pursuant to section 15-4(b).

     §11-B  Procedures for conducting elections by mail.  (a)  Ballot
packages for elections by mail shall include:

     (1)  An official ballot;

     (2)  A pre-paid postage return identification
envelope;

     (3)  A secrecy envelope; and

     (4)  Instructions.

     (b) 
To the extent practicable, the county clerk shall mail a ballot package by
nonforwardable mail to each registered voter in the county no earlier than eighteen
days and no later than fourteen days before the date of an election.  Nothing
in this part shall be construed to change the responsibilities of the chief
election officer under chapter 15D with respect to uniform military and
overseas voters.

     (c) 
The chief election officer shall determine and provide for voter service
centers and places of deposit pursuant to this part and section 11-92.1.

     §11-C  Public notice of
mailing.  Public notice of the date or dates that
ballot packages are mailed shall be given by the chief election officer and all
county election officers in the manner prescribed in section 1-28.5 when all
the packages have been mailed or made available to voters.

     §11-D  Ballot instructions; ballot return.  (a)  After receipt of the ballot package, to cast a valid vote, the
voter shall comply with the instructions included in the ballot package.  The
instructions shall include directions for:

     (1)  Marking the ballot;

     (2)  Inserting the marked ballot in the
secrecy envelope;

     (3)  Inserting the secrecy envelope with the
marked ballot in the return identification envelope; and

     (4)  Signing the return identification
envelope before mailing or delivering the return identification envelope
containing the secrecy envelope with the marked ballot.

     (b)  The
instructions shall include information on election fraud and voter fraud, as
provided in sections 19-3(5) and 19-3.5, and notice that a violation of either section may subject the voter, upon conviction,
to imprisonment, a fine, or both.

     (c) 
To cast a valid ballot, the voter shall return the marked ballot in the return
identification envelope containing the secrecy envelope with the marked ballot:

     (1)  By mail so that the return
identification envelope is received at the office of the clerk no later than
the time provided in section 11-131 on the date of the election;

     (2)  By personal delivery to any place of
deposit no later than 6:00 p.m. on the day preceding the date of the election;
or

     (3)  By personal delivery to any voter
service center no later than the time provided in section 11-131 on the date of
the election.

     §11-E  Replacement
ballots.  (a)  A voter may obtain a replacement
ballot if the ballot was destroyed, spoiled, or lost.  Replacement ballots
shall be provided to a voter who completes and signs a replacement ballot request
form.  The replacement ballot request form shall include information that
allows the clerk to verify the registration of the voter and ensure that
another ballot has not been returned by the voter.

     (b) 
Upon receipt of the replacement ballot request form, the clerk shall:

     (1)  Verify the registration of the voter and
ensure that another ballot has not been returned by the voter;

     (2)  Note on the list of registered voters
that the voter has requested a replacement ballot;

     (3)  Mark the return identification envelope
as containing a replacement ballot; and

     (4)  Issue the replacement ballot package by
mail or by making the ballot package available for pick-up by the voter.

     (c) 
Voters requesting a replacement ballot shall return the return identification
envelope containing the secrecy envelope with the marked replacement ballot by
mail or by personal delivery to a place of deposit no later than 6:00 p.m. on
the day preceding the date of the election or by personal delivery to a voter
service center no later than the time provided in section 11-131 on the date of
the election.

     §11-F  Deficient return identification envelopes.  If:

     (1)  A return identification envelope is
returned with an unsigned affirmation;

     (2)  The affirmation signature does not match
a reference signature image in the voter registration files; or

     (3)  A return identification envelope
contains another signature discrepancy that would invalidate the counting of
the ballot,

the clerk shall make a reasonable
attempt to notify the voter by first class postal mail, telephone, or
electronic mail to inform the voter of a procedure to correct the deficiency. 
The voter shall have five business days after the date of the election to cure
the deficiency using the procedure.  Counting of ballots and disclosure of
results may proceed during the five-day period.  An inability by the clerk to
contact any voters under this section shall not be grounds for contest for
cause under section 11-172.

     §11-G  Electronic transmission under certain circumstances.  If:

     (1)  A ballot package is not received by a
voter within five days of an election;

     (2)  A voter otherwise requires a replacement
ballot within five days of an election; or

     (3)  A voter would otherwise not be able to
return the voter's properly issued ballot by the close of the polls,

the voter may request that a
ballot be forwarded by electronic transmission.  Upon receipt of such a request
and confirmation that proper application was made, the clerk may transmit the
appropriate ballot, together with a form containing the affirmations and
information required by section 15-6, and a form containing a waiver of the
right to secrecy under section 11-137.  The voter may return the voted
replacement ballot and executed forms by electronic transmission, mail, or
deposit at a place of deposit or voter service center; provided that the ballot
and forms are received by the issuing clerk no later than the close of the
polls on election day.  Upon receipt, the clerk shall verify compliance with
the requirements of this part; provided that if the voter returns multiple
voted ballots for the same election, the clerk shall prepare for counting only
the first ballot returned that is not spoiled.

     §11-H 
Counting of mail-in ballots.  Counting may begin
no sooner than the tenth day before the election.  In the presence of official
observers, counting center employees may start to count the ballots; provided
that any tabulation of the number of votes cast for a candidate or question
appearing on the ballot, including a counting center printout or other
disclosure, shall be kept confidential and shall not be disclosed to the public
until voting for the election has concluded.  All handling and counting of
election by mail ballots shall be according to procedures established by the
chief election officer.

     §11-I 
Voter service centers; places of deposit.  (a) 
Beginning on January 1 of the year in which election by mail is scheduled to be
implemented in a county pursuant to this part, the respective clerk, after
consultation with the chief election officer, shall designate at least one
location in the county to serve as a voter service center.  The office of the
clerk of each respective county may serve as a voter service center, as may any
other locations that the clerk determines will serve the particular needs of
the county's voters.  Section 11-21 relating to changes and transfers of
registration shall apply to each voter service center as though it were the
precinct at which a person's name properly appears on the list of registered
voters.

     (b)  Voter
service centers shall be open from the tenth day preceding the day of the
election through the day of the election and at the same times statewide,
except as may be provided in section 11-92.3 or by the chief election officer
through administrative rules.

     (c) 
Each voter service center shall provide the services specified in section 11-1
under the definition of "voter service center".

     (d) 
The county clerks may also designate and provide for places of deposit if
locations and apparatus for the purposes specified in this part can be securely
maintained throughout the period of use for each election.

     §11-J  Election expenses and responsibilities for elections by mail.  (a)  Election expenses in an election by mail shall be as follows:

     (1)  Expenses related to elections by mail
involving both state and county offices, or involving both federal and county
offices, unrelated to voter registration, shall be divided in half between the
State and the counties.  Each county shall pay a proration of expenses as a
proportion of the registered voters at the time of the general election.  The
counties shall separately be responsible for expenses associated with voter
registration;

     (2)  All expenses for county elections by
mail, which do not involve state or federal offices, shall be borne by the
county and paid out of appropriations as may be made by the council; and

     (3)  All expenses for state or federal
elections by mail, which do not involve county offices, shall be borne by the
State and paid out of appropriations as may be made by the legislature. 
Expenses attributable to registration of voters by the clerk for state or
federal elections that do not involve county offices shall be borne by the
State and paid out of appropriations as may be made by the legislature.

     (b) 
Election responsibilities for elections by mail shall be as follows:

     (1)  For elections by mail involving both
state and county offices, or involving both federal and county offices:

         (A)  The counties shall be responsible for
voter registration, absentee voting, and the mailing and receipt of ballots;

         (B)  The State shall be responsible for the
printing and counting of ballots;

         (C)  The State and counties may otherwise agree
to the delegation of these responsibilities to each other; and

         (D)  Any responsibilities not specified in this
paragraph may be assigned to the counties or the State by the chief election
officer;

     (2)  For elections by mail involving only
county offices, the respective county shall be solely responsible; and

     (3)  For elections by mail involving only
state or federal offices:

         (A)  The counties shall be responsible for
voter registration and absentee voting;

         (B)  The State shall be responsible for the
printing, mailing, receipt, and counting of ballots; and

         (C)  Any responsibilities not specified in this
paragraph may be assigned to the counties or the State by the chief election
officer."

     SECTION
3.  Chapter 11, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to
part X to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:

     "§11-    Postponed elections; disclosure of voting
results.  Whenever
the conduct of an election within any precinct has been postponed:

     (1)  By the chief election officer or clerk
in county elections because of a natural disaster pursuant to section 11-92.3;
or

     (2)  By the governor during a state of
emergency pursuant to section 127A-13(a)(9),

the printout by the counting
center computer or other disclosure of the number of votes cast for each
candidate or question appearing on the ballot for the postponed election, from
any precinct whether or not designated for postponement, including votes cast
by absentee ballot or in an election by mail pursuant to part
   , shall not be disclosed to the public until voting for the
postponed election has concluded.  For candidates or questions not appearing on
the ballot for the postponed election, the chief election officer or clerk in
county elections may postpone the printout or other disclosure of the number of
votes cast until voting for the postponed election has concluded."

     SECTION
4.  Section 11-1, Hawaii
Revised Statutes, is amended as follows:

     1. 
By adding four new definitions to be appropriately inserted and to read:

     ""Electronic
transmission" shall have the same meaning as in section 15-1.

     "Place
of deposit" means a site designated pursuant to section 11-I for the
purpose of receiving return identification envelopes in an election conducted
by mail pursuant to part    .

     "Poll"
or "polling place" means an office or other suitable facility
designated by the respective clerks for the conduct of voting.  Beginning on
January 1, 2018, the term "poll" or "polling place" shall
include a voter service center in a county where elections by mail has been
implemented.

     "Voter
service center" means a location established pursuant to section 11-I to
serve all of the following purposes:

     (1)  Receive return envelopes for absentee
and permanent absentee ballots pursuant to chapter 15;

     (2)  Receive return identification
envelopes in an election by mail pursuant to part    ;

     (3)  Provide voting machine services for
persons with disabilities pursuant to the Help America Vote Act of 2002 (Public
Law 107-252), as amended, and any other federal or state law relating to
persons with disabilities;

     (4)  Assist with voter registration
services as provided by law, including late registration pursuant
to section 11-15.2; and

     (5)  Any other purposes the chief election
officer may deem necessary in the event of a natural disaster or other exigent
circumstances occurring prior to an election."

     2. 
By amending the definitions of "ballot" and "voting system"
to read:

     ""Ballot"[,]
means a ballot, including an absentee ballot, that is a
written or printed, or partly written and partly printed paper or papers,
containing the names of persons to be voted for, the office to be filled, and
the questions or issues to be voted on.  "Ballot" includes a
ballot used in an election by mail pursuant to part    .  A
ballot may consist of one or more cards or pieces of paper, or one face of a
card or piece of paper, or a portion of the face of a card or piece of paper,
depending on the number of offices, candidates to be elected thereto, questions
or issues to be voted on, and the voting system in use.  It shall also include
the face of the mechanical voting machine when arranged with cardboard or other
material within the ballot frames, containing the names of the candidates and
questions to be voted on.

     "Voting
system"[,] means the use of paper ballots, electronic [ballot
cards,] transmission, voting machines, elections by mail pursuant
to part    , absentee voting pursuant to chapter 15, or any
system by which votes are cast and counted."

     SECTION
5.  Section 11-4, Hawaii
Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:

     "§11‑4 
Rules [and regulations].  (a) 
The chief election officer may [make,]
adopt, amend, and repeal [such] rules [and
regulations] governing elections held under this title, election
procedures, and the selection, establishment, use, and operation of all voting
systems now in use or to be adopted in the State, and all other similar matters
relating thereto as in the chief election officer's judgment shall be necessary
to carry out this title.

     (b)  In [making,] adopting, amending, and repealing rules [and regulations] for voters
who cannot vote [at the polls] in person or receive or return ballots
by mail, and all other voters, the chief election officer shall provide for
voting by [such] these persons in [such] a manner
as to [insure] ensure secrecy of the ballot and to preclude
tampering with the ballots of these voters and other election frauds.  [Such]
The rules [and regulations], when adopted in conformity with
chapter 91 and upon approval by the governor, shall have the force and effect
of law."

     SECTION 6.  Section 11-15.2, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is
amended to read as follows:

     "[[]§11-15.2[]]
Late registration.  (a)  Notwithstanding the closing of the general county
register pursuant to section 11-24, a person who is eligible to vote but is not
registered to vote may register by appearing in person:

     (1)  Prior
to the day of the election, at any absentee polling place established pursuant
to section 15-7 or voter service center established pursuant to section 11-I
in the county associated with the person's residence; or

     (2)  On
the day of the election, at the polling place in the precinct associated with
the person's residence[.] or voter service center established
pursuant to section 11-I in the county associated with the person's residence.

     (b)  The county clerk shall
designate a registration clerk, who may be an election official, at each of the
absentee polling places in the county established pursuant to section 15-7,
prior to the day of the election [and at].  At each of the
polling places in the county on the day of the election[.], an
election official shall be designated to serve as a registration clerk.

     (c)  The registration clerk shall [process]
accept applications for any person not registered to vote who submits a
signed affidavit in accordance with section 11-15, which shall include a sworn
affirmation:

     (1)  Of the person's qualification to vote;

     (2)  Acknowledging that the person has not voted and will not vote at
any other polling place for that election and has not cast and will not cast
any absentee ballot pursuant to chapter 15 for that election; and

     (3)  Acknowledging that providing false
information may result in a class C felony, punishable by a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or imprisonment not exceeding five years, or both."

     SECTION
7.  Section 11-17, Hawaii
Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:

     "(a) 
The clerk, not later than 4:30 p.m. on the sixtieth day after every general
election, shall remove the name of any registered voter who did not vote in
that general election, and also did not vote in the primary election preceding
that general election, and also did not vote in the previous general election,
and also did not vote in the primary election preceding that general election,
and also did not vote in the regularly scheduled special elections held in
conjunction with those primary and general elections, if any, with the
exception of:

     (1)  Those who submitted written requests for
absentee ballots as provided in section 15-4; or

     (2)  Anyone who preregistered pursuant to
section 11-12(b).

If a person voted, at least once,
in any of the above-mentioned elections, the person's name shall remain on the
list of registered voters.  For this purpose, "vote" means the
depositing of the ballot in the ballot box regardless of whether the
ballot is blank or later rejected for any reason.  In the case of voting
machines, "vote" means the voter has activated the proper
mechanism and fed the vote into the machine.  In the case of an election by
mail pursuant to part    , "vote" means the voter has
returned the ballot to the chief election officer or clerk by the United States
Postal Service or by delivering the ballot to a place of deposit or voter
service center."

     SECTION
8.  Section 11-92.1, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended by amending its title and subsection (a) to read as
follows:

     "§11-92.1 
Election proclamation; [establishment of a new precinct.] places of
deposit; voter service centers.  (a)  The
chief election officer shall issue a proclamation [whenever a new precinct
is established in any representative district.] listing all
polling places and, in counties where elections by mail have been implemented
pursuant to part    , places of deposit, and voter service
centers.  Places of deposit may be open as soon as election by mail ballot
packets are made available to voters.  The chief election officer shall
provide a suitable polling place for each precinct[.] in counties
where elections by mail have not been implemented.  Beginning on January 1,
2018, voter service centers shall be made available pursuant to section 11-I in
a county where elections by mail have been implemented.  Schools,
recreational halls, park facilities, and other publicly owned or controlled
buildings, whenever possible and convenient, shall be used as polling places[.]
or, in the case of elections by mail pursuant to part    , as voter service centers.  The chief election officer shall make arrangements for the rental
or erection of suitable shelter for this purpose whenever public buildings are
not available and shall cause these polling places or voter service centers
to be equipped with the necessary facilities for lighting, ventilation, and
equipment needed for elections on any island.  This proclamation may be issued jointly
with the proclamation required in section 11-91."

     SECTION
9.  Section 11-92.3, Hawaii
Revised Statutes, is amended by amending its title and subsection (a) to read
as follows:

     "§11-92.3  [Consolidated precincts;
natural] Natural disasters; postponement; absentee voting [required];
elections by mail; special elections.  (a)  In the event of a flood, tsunami, earthquake,
volcanic eruption, high wind, or other natural disaster, occurring prior to an
election, that makes a precinct or voter service center inaccessible,
the chief election officer or county clerk in the case of county elections may
consolidate precincts or provide an alternate precinct or voter service center
within a representative district[.] or county, as applicable.  If
the extent of damage caused by any natural disaster is such that the ability of
voters, in any precinct, district, or county, to exercise their right to vote
is substantially impaired, the chief election officer or county clerk in the
case of county elections may [require]:

     (1)  Require
the registered voters of the affected precinct, district, or county to
vote by absentee ballot pursuant to section 15-2.5 [and may postpone]
or by mail pursuant to part    ; and

     (2)  Postpone
the conducting of an election in the affected precinct, district, or county
for no more than twenty-one days; provided that any such postponement shall not
affect the conduct of the election, tabulation, or distribution of results for
those precincts, districts, or counties not designated for postponement.

The chief election officer or county clerk in the case of
county elections shall give notice of the consolidation, postponement, or
requirement to vote by absentee ballot[,] or by mail, in the
affected [county or] precinct, county, or district prior to the
opening of [the] each precinct polling place by whatever possible
news or broadcast media are available.  Precinct officials and workers affected
by any consolidation shall not forfeit their pay."

     SECTION 10.  Section 11-173.5, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is
amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:

     "(a) 
In primary and special primary election contests, and county election contests
held concurrently with a regularly scheduled primary or special primary
election, the complaint shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the
supreme court not later than 4:30 p.m. on the [sixth] thirteenth
day after a primary or special primary election, or county election contests
held concurrently with a regularly scheduled primary or special primary election,
and shall be accompanied by a deposit for costs of court as established by
rules of the supreme court.  The clerk shall issue to the defendants named in
the complaint a summons to appear before the supreme court not later than 4:30
p.m. on the fifth day after service thereof."

     SECTION
11.  Section 11-184, Hawaii
Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:

     "§11-184 
Election expenses and responsibilities in combined state and county elections.  Election expenses in elections involving both state and county
offices, except for elections conducted by mail in whole or in part,
shall be shared as set forth below:

     (1)  The State shall pay and be responsible
for:

         (A)  Precinct officials;

         (B)  Instruction of precinct officials when
initiated or approved by the chief election officer;

         (C)  Boards of registration;

         (D)  Polling place costs other than supplies:
installation rentals, ballot boxes, voting booths, custodians, telephones, and
maintenance;

         (E)  Other equipment such as ballot transport
containers;

         (F)  Temporary election employees hired to do
strictly state work; and

         (G)  Extraordinary voter registration and voter
education costs when approved by the chief election officer[.];

     (2)  The county shall pay and be responsible
for:

         (A)  Normal voter registration, voters list
maintenance, and all printing connected with voter registration, including
printing of the voters list;

         (B)  Temporary election employees hired to do
strictly county work;

         (C)  Maintenance of existing voting machines,
including parts, freight, storage, programming, and personnel;

         (D)  Maintenance and storage of voting devices
and other equipment; and

         (E)  Employees assigned to conduct absentee
polling place functions[.]; and

     (3)  The remaining election expenses shall be
divided in half between the State and the counties.  Each county will pay a
proration of expenses as a proportion of the registered voters at the time of
the general election.  These expenses shall include but not be limited to:

         (A)  Polling place supplies;

         (B)  All printing, including ballots, but
excluding printing connected with voter registration;

         (C)  Temporary election employees not including
voting machine programmers doing work for both the State and county;

         (D)  Ballot preparation and packing; and

         (E)  All other costs for which the State or
county are not specifically responsible relating to the operation of voting
machines, electronic voting systems, and other voting systems except paper
ballots to include but not be limited to real property rentals, equipment
rentals, personnel, mileage, telephones, supplies, publicity, computer
programming, and freight.

              The responsibility for the above
functions shall be determined by the chief election officer where the
responsibility for such functions has not been assigned by the legislature.

     Any
future expenses not presently incurred under any voting system now in use or to
be used shall be assigned to [paragraphs] paragraph (1), (2), or
(3) [above] by the chief election officer upon agreement with the clerks
or by the legislature."

     SECTION 12.  Section 15-4, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is
amended by amending subsection (e) to read as follows:

     "(e)  When a registered voter requests an absentee ballot, the voter
also may include an additional request to receive absentee ballots
permanently.  After receiving a request for permanent absentee voter status,
the clerk shall mail to the voter who requested permanent absentee voter status
an absentee ballot for all subsequent elections conducted in that precinct.  The
forwarding address for absentee ballots to be permanently mailed shall be the
in-state mailing address contained in the voter's registration record.  Subject
to the conditions of subsection (a), a permanent absentee voter or a voter in an election by mail pursuant to part    of
chapter 11 may also request from the clerk that the
voter's ballot be forwarded temporarily to an address other than the permanent
absentee mailing address originally requested[,] or for the
purposes of part     of chapter 11, either in or outside of the State, for a single election or for a
primary or special primary election and the election immediately following the
primary or special primary election.  A [permanent
absentee] voter's request for a ballot to be
forwarded temporarily shall not serve as a cancellation of the voter's
permanent absentee status [or], as a change to the voter's
permanent absentee mailing address[.],
or as a change to a voter's registered address for an election by mail pursuant
to part     of chapter 11.  Upon the
completion of the election or elections covered by the [permanent absentee] voter's temporary
request under this subsection, the clerk shall resume mailing the voter's
ballots to the permanent absentee mailing address originally requested under
subsection (a)[.], or to a voter's
registered address for an election by mail pursuant to part     of
chapter 11."

     SECTION
13.  Section 15D-3, Hawaii
Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:

     "[[]§15D-3[]]  Elections covered.  The voting procedures in this chapter apply to:

     (1)  A general, special, or primary election for
federal office;

     (2)  A general, special, or primary election
for statewide or state legislative office or state ballot measure; and

     (3)  A general, special, recall, primary, or runoff
election for local government office or local ballot measure conducted under [section
11-91.5] part     of chapter 11 for which absentee
voting or voting by mail is available for other voters."

     SECTION
14.  Section 19-6, Hawaii
Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:

     "§19-6 
Misdemeanors.  The following persons shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor:

     (1)  Any person who offers any bribe or makes
any promise of gain, or with knowledge of the same permits any person to offer
any bribe or make any promise of gain for the person's benefit to any voter to
induce the voter to sign a nomination paper, and any person who accepts any
bribe or promise of gain of any kind as consideration for signing the same,
whether the bribe or promise of gain be offered or accepted before or after the
signing;

     (2)  Any person who wilfully tears down [or],
destroys, or defaces any election proclamation [or any],
poster [or], notice [or], list of voters [or],
visual aids, or facsimile ballot, issued or posted by authority of law;

     (3)  Any person printing or duplicating or
causing to be printed or duplicated any ballot, conforming as to the size,
weight, shape, thickness, or color to the official ballot so that it could be
cast or counted as an official ballot in an election;

     (4)  Every person who is disorderly or
creates a disturbance whereby any meeting of the precinct officials or the
board of registration of voters during an election is disturbed or interfered
with; or whereby any person who intends to be lawfully present at any meeting
or election is prevented from attending; or who causes any disturbance at any
election; and every person assisting or aiding or abetting any disturbance;

     (5)  Every person who, either in person or
through another, in any manner breaks up or prevents, or endeavors to break up
or prevent, the holding of any meeting of the board of registration of voters,
or in any manner breaks up or prevents, or endeavors to break up or prevent,
the holding of any election;

     (6)  Any person, other than those designated
by section 11‑132, who remains or loiters within the area set aside for
voting as set forth in section 11-132 during the time appointed for voting;

     (7)  Any person, including candidates
carrying on any campaign activities within the area described in section 11-132
during the period of time starting one hour before the polling place opens and
ending when the polling place closes for the purpose of influencing votes. 
Campaign activities shall include the following:

         (A)  Any distribution, circulation, carrying,
holding, posting, or staking of campaign cards, pamphlets, posters, and
other literature;

         (B)  The use of public address systems and
other public communication media;

         (C)  The use of motor caravans or parades; and

         (D)  The use of entertainment troupes or the
free distribution of goods and services;

     (8)  Any person who opens a return envelope
containing [an]:

         (A)  An absentee ballot voted
under chapter 15 other than those persons authorized to do so under
chapter 15; or

         (B)  A ballot voted by mail under
part     of chapter 11 other than those persons authorized to do
so under part     of chapter 11;

     (9)  Any unauthorized person found in
possession of any voting machine or keys thereof; and

    (10)  Every person who wilfully violates or
fails to obey any of the provisions of law, punishment for which is not
otherwise specified in this chapter [specially provided for]."

     SECTION 15.  Section 11-91.5, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is
repealed.

     ["§11-91.5 
Federal, state, and county elections by mail.  (a)  Any federal,
state, or county election held other than on the date of a regularly scheduled
primary or general election may be conducted by mail.

     (b) 
The chief election officer shall determine whether a federal or state election,
other than a regularly scheduled primary or general election, may be conducted
by mail or at polling places.

     (c) 
The county clerk shall determine whether a county election, held other than on
the date of a regularly scheduled primary or general election, may be conducted
by mail or at polling places.  An election by mail in the county shall be under
the supervision of the county clerk.

     (d) 
Any ballot cast by mail under this section shall be subject to the provisions
applicable to absentee ballots under sections 11-139 and 15-6.

     (e) 
The chief election officer shall adopt rules pursuant to chapter 91 to provide
for uniformity in the conduct of federal, state, and county elections by mail."]

     SECTION
16.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues
of the State of Hawaii the sum of
$           or so much
thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2017-2018
and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year
2018-2019 for the purpose of implementing and administering elections by mail,
including voter education and public awareness programs.

     The
sums appropriated shall be expended by the office of
elections for the purposes of this Act.

     SECTION
17.  No later than twenty days prior to the
convening of each regular session of the legislature, from 2018
until 2023, the office of elections shall submit a report to the legislature
that includes:

     (1)  The office's progress in implementing
this Act;

     (2)  The office's proposals for
working with the county clerks to eventually merge permanent absentee voter
registration lists with non-absentee voter registration lists used for the
purposes of implementing this Act;

     (3)  Any additional resources the office may
require to implement this Act;

     (4)  Any difficulties encountered;

     (5)  Specific steps taken and recommendations
necessary to prevent fraud and ensure the integrity of the election process;
and

     (6)  Any other findings and recommendations,
including any proposed legislation necessary to clarify and make consistent
chapters 11, 12, 15, and 15D, Hawaii Revised Statutes, in light of the
transition to statewide elections by mail.

     SECTION
18.  In codifying the new sections added by section 2
of this Act, the revisor of statutes shall substitute appropriate section
numbers for the letters used in designating the new sections in this Act.

     SECTION
19.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed
and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.

     SECTION
20.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2017; provided that:

     (1)  Section 6 shall take effect on
January 1, 2018; and

     (2)  Section 15 shall take effect on the date of the 2020 primary election.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


