

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 235, Hawaii Revised Statutes,
is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read
as follows:

     "ยง235-    Income
tax credit for exchange program hosts.  (a)  There shall be allowed
to each taxpayer subject to the tax imposed under this chapter, a credit that
shall be deductible from the taxpayer's net income tax liability, if any,
imposed by this chapter for the taxable year in which the credit is properly
claimed.

     (b)  In the case of a partnership, S
corporation, estate, or trust, the tax credit allowable is for qualified
expenses incurred by the entity for the taxable year.  The expenses upon which
the tax credit is computed shall be determined at the entity level. 
Distribution and share of credit shall be determined by rule.

     (c)  The amount of the tax credit shall be
equal to the qualified expenses, as defined in this section, of the taxpayer;
provided that:

     (1)  If a deduction is taken under section
170(g) (with respect to amounts paid to maintain certain students as members of
the taxpayer's household) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, no
tax credit under this section shall be allowed for those costs for which the
deduction is taken pursuant to section 170(g); and

     (2)  The amount of the tax credit shall not
exceed $400 multiplied by the number of full calendar months during the taxable
year that the taxpayer acts as a host family for a foreign exchange individual.

     (d)  The director of taxation:

     (1)  Shall prepare any forms that may be
necessary to claim a tax credit under this section;

     (2)  May require the taxpayer to furnish
reasonable information to ascertain the validity of the claim for credit made
under this section; and

     (3)  May adopt rules under chapter 91
necessary to effectuate the purposes of this section.

     (e)  If the tax credit under this section
exceeds the taxpayer's income tax liability, the excess of the credit over
liability may be used as a credit against the taxpayer's income tax liability
in subsequent years until exhausted.  All claims for the tax credit under this section,
including amended claims, shall be filed on or before the end of the twelfth
month following the close of the taxable year for which the credit may be
claimed.  Failure to comply with the foregoing provision shall constitute a
waiver of the right to claim the credit.

     (f)  For the purposes of this section:

     "Foreign exchange individual"
means a person who:

     (1)  Is an international student or pupil,
fellow, intern, including those who are participants in an intern exchange or
student exchange program of the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs of
the United States Department of State; and

     (2)  Holds a valid F-1, J-1, or M-1 visa,
issued by the United States Department of State.

     "Host family" means a taxpayer who
provides room and board to maintain a foreign exchange individual for a minimum
of thirty days; provided that the room and board is provided on a voluntary
basis with no remuneration.

     "Qualified expenses" means
expenses incurred by a taxpayer solely and directly as a result of the taxpayer
acting as a host family to a foreign exchange individual.  Qualified expenses
do not include any amounts paid by a taxpayer:

     (1)  To maintain a relative of the taxpayer
as a member of the taxpayer's household, regardless of whether or not the
relative of the taxpayer otherwise fulfills the requirements of a foreign
exchange individual; or

     (2)  For which the taxpayer receives any
money or other property as compensation or reimbursement for maintaining the
foreign exchange individual in the taxpayer's household.

     "Relative of the taxpayer" means
an individual who, with respect to the taxpayer, bears any of the relationships
described in section 152(d)(2)(A) to (G) of the Internal Revenue Code."

     SECTION 2.  New statutory material is
underscored.

     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2051,
and shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2016.

