

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that injured
workers, generally of average adult age and employed, are dissimilar from the medicare
population, mostly an elderly group with chronic degenerative conditions. 
Injured workers need immediate access to physicians and rehabilitative
providers for treatment to appropriately return to work as soon as possible.  Access
to medical and rehabilitative treatment for injured workers is restricted
because few providers accept workers' compensation patients due to burdensome
documentation and reporting, slow approval and payment processing, and
inadequate fee reimbursements.  Access to workers' compensation treatment is
especially limited on neighbor islands where there is already a shortage of
physicians.

     Section 386-21, Hawaii Revised Statutes, requires
the director of labor and industrial relations to determine charges that do not
exceed one hundred ten per cent of fees prescribed in the Medicare Resource
Based Relative Value Scale applicable to Hawaii and allows the director to
establish an additional fee schedule under certain circumstances.  The state auditor's
2013 "Report on Methodology for the Department of Labor and Industrial
Relations' Workers' Compensation Medical Fee Schedule" states that flat medicare
fee reimbursement rates since at least 2011 indicate the need for an incentive
for doctors.  Currently, medicare physician fee reimbursements are about eighty
per cent of those paid by private health insurance.  These fee reimbursements
are projected to drop to forty per cent within twenty years and to twenty-five
per cent in seventy-five years.  If Congress continues to allow this reimbursement
differential, increasingly severe problems with access to physician services
are expected.

     The legislature further finds that the United
States Department of Labor Office of Workers' Compensation Programs (OWCP), a
nationwide program for federal workers, protects the interests of workers who
are injured or become ill on the job, their families, and their employers by
making timely, appropriate, and accurate decisions on claims, providing prompt
payment of benefits, and helping injured workers return to gainful work as
early as is feasible.  The OWCP fee schedule provides the necessary incentive
for Hawaii's physicians and rehabilitation providers to treat injured workers
and eliminates the need for the department of labor and industrial relations'
limited staff and resources to review thousands of fee codes to determine
appropriate reimbursement.

     The purpose of this Act is to ensure that
injured workers receive medical treatment through rates and fees that are
adequate for standards of services and care intended for injured employees.

     SECTION 2.  Section 386-21, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (c) to read as follows:

     "(c)  The liability of the employer for
medical care, services, and supplies shall be limited to the charges [computed]
as set forth in this section.  [The director shall make determinations of
the charges and adopt fee schedules based upon those determinations.] 
Effective January 1, [1997,] 2018, and for each succeeding
calendar year thereafter, the charges shall [not exceed one hundred ten per
cent of fees prescribed in the Medicare Resource Based Relative Value Scale
applicable to Hawaii as prepared by the United States Department of Health and
Human Services, except as provided in this subsection.] correspond to
codes and fees as established in the United States Department of Labor Office
Workers' Compensation Programs fee schedule.  The rates or fees provided
for in this section shall be adequate to ensure at all times the standard of
services and care intended by this chapter to injured employees.

     If the director determines that an allowance
under the [medicare program is not reasonable or if] United States
Department of Labor Office Workers' Compensation Programs fee schedule for
a medical treatment, accommodation, product, or service existing as of June 29,
1995, is not covered under the [medicare program,] fee schedule,
the director, at any time, may establish an additional fee schedule or
schedules not [exceeding] below the prevalent charge for fees for
services actually received by providers of health care services, to cover
charges for that treatment, accommodation, product, or service.  [If no
prevalent charge for a fee for service has been established for a given service
or procedure, the director shall adopt a reasonable rate which shall be the
same for all providers of health care services to be paid for that service or
procedure.]

     The director shall update the schedules required
by this section every three years or annually, as required.  The updates shall
be based upon[:

     (1)  Future] future charges or
additions prescribed in the [Medicare Resource Based Relative Value Scale
applicable to Hawaii as prepared by the United States Department of Health and
Human Services; or

     (2)  A statistically valid survey by the
director of prevalent charges for fees for services actually received by
providers of health care services or based upon the information provided to the
director by the appropriate state agency having access to prevalent charges for
medical fee information.] Office Workers' Compensation Programs fee
schedule as prepared by the United States Department of Labor.

     When a dispute exists between an insurer or
self-insured employer and a medical services provider regarding the amount of a
fee for medical services, the director may resolve the dispute in a summary
manner as the director may prescribe; provided that a provider shall not charge
more than the provider's private patient charge for the service rendered.

     When a dispute exists between an employee and
the employer or the employer's insurer regarding the proposed treatment plan or
whether medical services should be continued, the employee shall continue to
receive essential medical services prescribed by the treating physician
necessary to prevent deterioration of the employee's condition or further
injury until the director issues a decision on whether the employee's medical
treatment should be continued.  The director shall make a decision within
thirty days of the filing of a dispute.  If the director determines that
medical services pursuant to the treatment plan should be or should have been
discontinued, the director shall designate the date after which medical services
for that treatment plan are denied.  The employer or the employer's insurer may
recover from the employee's personal health care provider qualified pursuant to
section 386-27, or from any other appropriate occupational or non-occupational
insurer, all the sums paid for medical services rendered after the date
designated by the director.  Under no circumstances shall the employee be
charged for the disallowed services, unless the services were obtained in
violation of section 386-98.  The attending physician, employee, employer, or
insurance carrier may request in writing that the director review the denial of
the treatment plan or the continuation of medical services."

     SECTION 3.  The department of labor and
industrial relations shall analyze the impact of this Act on workers'
compensation claimants' access to appropriate treatment and report its findings
and recommendations, including any proposed legislation, to the legislature no
later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2024.

     SECTION 4.  There is appropriated out of the
general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of
$           or so much
thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2017-2018 and the same sum or so
much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2018-2019 for analysis of the
impact of this Act on workers' compensation claimants' access to appropriate
treatment.

     The sums appropriated shall be expended
by the department of labor and industrial relations for the purposes of this
Act.

     SECTION 5.  Statutory material to be repealed
is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.

     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect on
January 1, 2018, and shall be repealed on December 31, 2024; provided that
section 386-21(c), Hawaii Revised Statutes, shall be reenacted in the form in
which it read on the day prior to the effective date of this Act.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


