

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that some
for-profit post-secondary educational institutions have engaged in serious
improprieties, causing the federal government to take action to mitigate the
impact of their behavior.  Ninety per cent of all students in these types of
institutions take out loans to pay for their education and have a twenty-five
per cent chance of defaulting on their loans in the first few years of their
education.  Due to the previous presidential administration's tightening of rules
on for-profit institutions, over twenty-eight institutions, including some of
the largest and most popular ones, have been charged with false advertising by
the Securities and Exchange Commission.

     The legislature also finds that the
inappropriate actions of for-profit post-secondary educational institutions disproportionally
affect lower income and vulnerable students and their families.  Indeed, many
of these for-profit institutions purposefully targeted persons of low income,
minorities, and struggling citizens.  The legislature believes that consumers
have a right to know that for-profit institutions, first and foremost, are concerned
with earning a profit, and not with supporting education as a means to
achieving student's goal of gainful employment.  The legislature further
believes that the status of these institutions as for-profit entities should be
reflected in their advertisements in order to prevent potential students from
being misled.

     The purpose of this Act is to require
accredited and non-accredited post-secondary educational institutions that are
for-profit entities to disclose in print and electronic media and signage that
they are for-profit businesses registered in the State.

     SECTION 2.  Chapter 305J, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and
to read as follows:

     "ยง305J-     Disclosures. 
(a)  Any private college or university and any seminary or religious
training institution that is registered in the State as a for-profit entity
shall disclose in all catalogs, promotional materials, electronic media, signage,
and contracts for instruction, the fact that the institution is a for-profit business. 
The disclosure shall be made in a type size as large or larger than any other
text in the catalog, promotional material, electronic media, signage, or
contract for instruction, excluding the name of the for-profit entity, and
shall be presented in a manner reasonably calculated to draw the attention of
the reader.  The disclosure shall read as follows:

(Name of
Degree Granting Institution) IS A FOR-PROFIT BUSINESS REGISTERED IN THE STATE
OF HAWAII

     (b)  Where promotional material for any
private college or university and any seminary or religious institution
consists of an advertisement in a periodical published by a person or entity that
is not affiliated with the college, university, seminary, or religious
institution, the disclosure required in subsection (a) may be abbreviated to
state as follows: A FOR-PROFIT BUSINESS IN THE STATE OF HAWAII.  The disclosure
required under this subsection shall be made in a type size as large or larger
than any other text in the advertisement."

     SECTION 3.  Section 446E-2, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended to read as follows:

     "ยง446E-2  Disclosures.  (a)  Any
unaccredited institution shall disclose in all catalogs, promotional materials,
electronic media, and contracts for instruction, the fact that the
institution is not accredited by any nationally recognized accrediting agency
listed by the United States Secretary of Education.  The disclosure shall be
made in a type size as large or larger than any other text in the catalog,
promotional material, electronic media, or contract for instruction,
excluding the name of the unaccredited institution, and shall be presented in a
manner reasonably calculated to draw the attention of the reader.  If the
unaccredited institution includes in its catalogs, promotional materials, or
contracts for instruction any other information relating in any manner to
accreditation, or to accreditation by an agency not nationally recognized by
the United States Secretary of Education, the disclosure required by this
subsection shall be repeated on every page on which the information appears. 
Where the information is presented electronically, the disclosure shall be made
directly preceding or following the information.  The disclosure shall read as
follows:

(Name of
Degree Granting Institution) IS NOT ACCREDITED

BY AN
ACCREDITING AGENCY

RECOGNIZED BY
THE UNITED STATES

SECRETARY OF
EDUCATION.

     Note: 
In the United States, many licensing authorities require accredited degrees as
the basis for eligibility for licensing.  In some cases, accredited colleges
may not accept for transfer courses and degrees completed at unaccredited
colleges, and some employers may require an accredited degree as a basis for
eligibility for employment.

     (b)  Where promotional material for an
unaccredited institution consists of an advertisement in a periodical published
by a person or entity that is not affiliated with the unaccredited institution,
the disclosure required in subsection (a) may be abbreviated to state as
follows: NOT ACCREDITED BY AN AGENCY RECOGNIZED BY THE U.S. SECRETARY OF
EDUCATION.  The disclosure required under this subsection shall be made in a
type size as large or larger than any other text in the advertisement.

     (c)  If the unaccredited institution is also
registered in the State as a for-profit entity, the institution shall also
disclose in all catalogs, promotional materials, electronic media, signage, and
contracts for instruction, the fact that the institution is a for-profit business. 
The disclosure shall be made in a type size as large or larger than any other
text in the catalog, promotional material, electronic media, signage, or
contract for instruction, excluding the name of the for-profit entity, and
shall be presented in a manner reasonably calculated to draw the attention of
the reader.  The disclosure shall read as follows:

(Name of
Degree Granting Institution) IS A FOR-PROFIT BUSINESS REGISTERED IN THE STATE
OF HAWAII

     (d)  Where promotional material for an
unaccredited institution consists of an advertisement in a periodical published
by a person or entity that is not affiliated with the unaccredited institution,
the disclosure required in subsection (c) may be abbreviated to state as
follows: A FOR-PROFIT BUSINESS IN THE STATE OF HAWAII.  The disclosure required
under this subsection shall be made in a type size as large or larger than any
other text in the advertisement.

     [(c)] (e)  Every unaccredited
institution subject to this chapter shall keep true and accurate records of
student enrollment, courses, fees, and matriculation rates.  These records
shall be retained for five years.  Upon demand, these records, and any other
information requested or subpoenaed by the director, shall be made available to
the director."

     SECTION 4.  This Act does not affect rights and
duties that matured, penalties that were incurred, and proceedings that were
begun before its effective date.

     SECTION 5.  Statutory material to be repealed
is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.

     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect upon its
approval.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


