

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that it is in
the best interest of the State of Hawaii for each and every state citizen to
have publicly provided, high quality, affordable health care.  Health care is
more than just medical insurance payouts ─ it includes cost-saving,
preventive, and early intervention measures to prohibit medical conditions from
becoming chronic, permanently disabling, or fatal.

     The legislature further finds that Hawaii's
current health care insurance system is a disjointed, costly, inefficient, and
unnecessarily complicated, multi-payer, private medical insurance model that is
mostly profit-driven, adversarial, beset with constant cost-shifting and
reluctant health care delivery, onerously bureaucratic, and economically irrational.

     Additionally, health care rates are
skyrocketing, creating an affordability and accessibility crisis for Hawaii's
residents.  The two largest cost-drivers of health care in the United States
and Hawaii are:

     (1)  The profit-driven complex of payment-reluctant,
multi-payer health insurance bureaucracies competing to insure only the healthy
and the wealthy, while leaving those who need health care the most to the
taxpayers; and

     (2)  The high cost of prescription drugs.

     The legislature further finds that for more
than a quarter of a century, Hawaii was far ahead of most other states and
often called itself "the health state" because of the 1974 Hawaii
Prepaid Health Care Act.  Hawaii was once known for having a low uninsured
population of between two and five per cent in 1994.

     However, the crisis in health care in the
United States has also befallen Hawaii.  Today, thousands of Hawaii citizens lack
health care coverage, many of whom are children.  Many other Hawaii residents
are underinsured, unable to use their insurance properly, or even at all,
because of increasingly expensive deductibles and out-of-pocket co-payments for
outpatient visits, diagnostic tests, and prescription drugs, among other
factors.  Even well-insured individuals experience problems with their insurers
denying, or very reluctantly dispensing, expensive medicines and treatments.  About
half of all bankruptcies are due to extremely expensive, catastrophic illnesses
that are not covered after a certain cap is reached.  Other persons are near
bankruptcy with their quality of life seriously impacted.

     The legislature further finds that a universal,
publicly administered, health care-for-all insurance model with one payout
agency for caregivers and providers, adapted to meet the unique conditions in
Hawaii, would be beneficial for the following reasons:

     (1)  For union members and their employers, it means
taking health care off the negotiating table;

     (2)  For patients, as taxpayers and insurance
premium-payers, it means significant reductions in overall costs, increases in
benefits, and the slowing of annual inflation cost increases.  It also means a
comeback from increasingly uncaring, profit-driven health care to the
restoration of human-need-driven, mutually respectful and caring patient-doctor-nurse-and
other caregiver relationships, which in earlier times were fundamental to
meaningful health care;

     (3)  For businesses, large and small, it reduces
significant overhead expenses;

     (4)  For the local economy, it means keeping almost
all health care dollars in the State;

     (5)  For government, it means having one integrated,
electronic, health information database for unprecedented planning and
cost-containment capabilities.  It also means relief from the perceived
emerging problem of unfunded liabilities associated with long-term funding of
government retiree health care benefits;

     (6)  For physicians, nurses, and other caregivers, it
means less paperwork, less work stress, and more time with patients;

     (7)  For hospitals, community health clinics, homecare
providers, and long-term care facilities, it means sufficient and dependable
annual financing through global budgets; and

     (8)  For the public, it means accessible and
affordable health care for every person and relief from the increasing stresses
of constant worries over health care coverage instability.

     The purpose of this Act is to create a unified,
single-payer, universal health care system covering all Hawaii residents.

     SECTION 2.  The Hawaii Revised Statutes is
amended by adding a new chapter to be appropriately designated and to read as
follows:

"Chapter

SINGLE-PAYER
UNIVERSAL HEALTH CARE SYSTEM

     §   -1  Single-payer
universal health care insurance system; established.  There is established
the single-payer universal health care insurance system to provide the same
high-quality level of medically necessary health care to all Hawaii citizens. 
Private health care insurers are prohibited from duplicating the coverages
provided by the single-payer universal health care insurance system.

     §   -2  State health care
insurance planning and financing authority.  (a)  There is established
within the department of health, for administrative purposes, the state health
care insurance planning and financing authority to determine the costs of the
system and to gather the needed financing methods and transition mechanisms.

     (b)  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, effective
July 1, 2019, the functions of the Hawaii health authority; the department
of labor and industrial relations as they relate to chapter 393, the Hawaii
Prepaid Health Care Act; and the Hawaii employer-union health benefits trust
fund under chapter 87A shall be transferred to the state health care insurance
planning and financing authority, and these functions shall be maintained until
fully integrated into the system by the state health care insurance planning
and financing authority.

     (c)  The authority shall be composed of nine
members appointed by the governor as provided in section 26-34; provided that
three members shall be appointed from a list of nominees submitted by the
speaker of the house of representatives and three members shall be appointed
from a list of nominees submitted by the president of the senate.  All members
shall be appointed for terms of four years each.  One member shall be selected
to be the executive director and confirmed by a majority vote of a quorum of
the members of the state health care insurance planning and financing
authority.

     (d)  Five members shall constitute a quorum,
whose affirmative vote shall be necessary for all valid actions by the
authority.

     (e)  The state health care insurance planning
and financing authority shall:

     (1)  Begin and maintain a trust fund comprised of a
pay-as-we-go transfer payments system and a reserve fund;

     (2)  Negotiate and receive all federal, state, and
other appropriate health care revenue;

     (3)  Assess temporary surcharges on the income and
general excise taxes for start-up and emergency costs as necessary, for
instance, during epidemic or other medical catastrophes;

     (4)  Be the single payer of universal health care
financing for Hawaii;

     (5)  Hire a chief executive officer who shall be
accountable for the development and success of the single-payer universal
health care system and other staff as necessary; and

     (6)  Conduct a continuous and ongoing program of
enrollment.

     (f)  The salary of the executive director shall
be $           a year, and
the salaries of the other members shall be $          
a year."

     SECTION 3.  Chapter 322H, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is repealed.

     SECTION 4.  All rights, powers, functions, and
duties of the Hawaii health authority, department of labor and industrial
relations as they relate to the Hawaii Prepaid Health Care Act, and Hawaii
employer-union benefits trust fund are transferred to the state health care
insurance planning and financing authority.

     All officers and employees whose functions are
transferred by this Act shall be transferred with their functions and shall
continue to perform their regular duties upon their transfer, subject to the
state personnel laws and this Act.

     No officer or employee of the State having
tenure shall suffer any loss of salary, seniority, prior service credit,
vacation, sick leave, or other employee benefit or privilege as a consequence
of this Act, and such officer or employee may be transferred or appointed to a
civil service position without the necessity of examination; provided that the
officer or employee possesses the minimum qualifications for the position to
which transferred or appointed; and provided that subsequent changes in status
may be made pursuant to applicable civil service and compensation laws.

     An officer or employee of the State who does
not have tenure and who may be transferred or appointed to a civil service
position as a consequence of this Act shall become a civil service employee
without the loss of salary, seniority, prior service credit, vacation, sick
leave, or other employee benefits or privileges and without the necessity of
examination; provided that such officer or employee possesses the minimum
qualifications for the position to which transferred or appointed.

     If an office or position held by an officer or
employee having tenure is abolished, the officer or employee shall not thereby
be separated from public employment, but shall remain in the employment of the
State with the same pay and classification and shall be transferred to some
other office or position for which the officer or employee is eligible under
the personnel laws of the State as determined by the head of the department or
the governor.

     SECTION 5.  All appropriations, records,
equipment, machines, files, supplies, contracts, books, papers, documents,
maps, and other personal property heretofore made, used, acquired, or held by
the department of labor and industrial relations regarding the Hawaii Prepaid
Health Care Act, Hawaii health authority, and Hawaii employer-union benefits
trust fund relating to the functions transferred to the state health care
insurance planning and financing authority shall be transferred with the
functions to which they relate.

     SECTION 6.  There is appropriated out of the
general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of
$           or so much
thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2017-2018 and the same sum or so
much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2018-2019 for the
establishment of the state health care insurance planning and financing
authority to operate a single-payer universal health care insurance system.

     The sums appropriated shall be expended
by the department of health for the purposes of this Act.

     SECTION 7.  This Act shall take effect on July
1, 2017.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


