

     SECTION 1.  Section 11-363, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended to read as follows:

     "[[]ยง11-363[]] 
Other contributions and expenditures.  (a)  Expenditures or
disbursements for electioneering communications as defined in section 11-341,
or any other coordinated activity made by any person for the benefit of a
candidate in cooperation, consultation, or concert with, or at the request or
suggestion of, a candidate, a candidate committee, or their agents, shall be
considered to be a contribution to the candidate and expenditure by the
candidate.

     (b)  The financing by any person of the
dissemination, distribution, or republication, in whole or in part, of any
broadcast or any written or other campaign materials prepared by the candidate,
candidate committee, or their agents shall be considered to be a
contribution to the candidate.

     This subsection shall not apply [to] if
the campaign material is: 

     (1)  Prepared and used by candidates for
governor or lieutenant governor, or their candidate committees,
supporting a co-candidate in the general election[.];

     (2)  Disseminated, distributed, or
republished by the candidate or the candidate committee that prepared the
material;

     (3)  Incorporated into an advertisement or
electioneering communication advocating the defeat of the candidate that
prepared that material; or

     (4)  Incorporated into a news story or
editorial disseminated by any broadcast station or publisher of periodicals or
newspapers, unless the candidate or the candidate committee that prepared the
material also owns or controls the broadcast station or publisher.

     [(b)] (c)  "Coordinated
activity" means:

     (1)  The payment by any person in cooperation,
consultation, or concert with, at the request of, or pursuant to, any general
or particular understanding with a candidate, candidate committee, the party of
a candidate, or an agent of a candidate, candidate committee, or the party of a
candidate;

     (2)  The payment by any person for the production,
dissemination, distribution, or republication of any written, graphic, or other
form of campaign material, in whole or in part, prepared by a candidate,
candidate committee, or noncandidate committee, or an agent of a candidate,
candidate committee, or noncandidate committee; or

     (3)  Any payment by any person or contract for any
electioneering communication, as defined in section 11-341, where the payment
is coordinated with a candidate, candidate committee, the party of the candidate,
or an agent of a candidate, candidate committee, or the party of the candidate.

     [(c)] (d)  No expenditure for a
candidate who files an affidavit with the commission agreeing to limit
aggregate expenditures by the candidate, including coordinated activity by any
person, shall be made or incurred by a candidate committee or noncandidate
committee without authorization of the candidate or the candidate's authorized
representative.  Every expenditure so authorized and made or incurred shall be
attributed to the candidate with whom the candidate committee or noncandidate
committee is directly associated for the purpose of imposing the expenditure
limitations set forth in section 11-423."

     SECTION 2.  Statutory material to be repealed
is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.

     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July
1, 2050.

