

SECTION 1.  The
legislature finds that most of the State's correctional facilities are
extremely old, are in need of significant repair and maintenance, and lack the
capacity to accommodate current and projected detention needs.

The Waiawa
correctional facility is a minimum-security facility that houses about three
hundred thirty adult male sentenced felons who participate in educational
programs and community worklines.

The Halawa
correctional facility consists of two separate facilities.  The special-needs
facility houses about one hundred maximum- and closed-custody inmates, inmates
with severe or chronic mental illness who cannot be placed in the general
population, and inmates who require protective custody.  The medium-security
prison facility houses approximately one thousand two hundred male sentenced
felons.

     To mitigate prison
overcrowding, there are about one thousand four hundred male inmates from
Halawa correctional facility who are housed in a contracted facility in Arizona
at a cost of more than $40,000,000 annually.

The Oahu community
correctional center is the largest jail facility in the State, housing about
one thousand two hundred pre-trial detainees, short-term sentenced individuals,
probation and parole violators, and a pre-release work furlough center.

The legislature
further finds that the Waiawa correctional facility is located on one hundred
ninety-seven acres in central Oahu with ample land area for a new,
higher-capacity correctional facility that could house additional inmates from
Halawa correctional facility and house Hawaii inmates from the contracted
facility in Arizona.  This in turn would enable the relocation of the Oahu
community correctional center to a renovated Halawa correctional facility.

The purpose of
this Act is to:

     (1)  Require the department of public safety to
solicit proposals for the purchase or construction of a three thousand-bed
correctional facility at the site of the Waiawa correctional facility.  The new
facility shall be capable of housing the current inmate population of the
Halawa correctional facility, Hawaii inmates now housed in Arizona, and the
inmate population of existing Waiawa correctional facility; and

     (2)  Upon completion of the new correctional facility
at the site of the Waiawa correctional facility, relocate the operations of the
Oahu community correctional center to the vacated site of the Halawa
correctional facility.

     SECTION 2.  (a)  The department of public
safety shall solicit proposals for the purchase or construction of a three
thousand-bed correctional facility at the site of the Waiawa correctional
facility that would be capable of housing the current inmate populations of the
Halawa correctional facility, Hawaii inmates now housed in Arizona, and the
inmate population of the existing Waiawa correctional facility.

     (b)  Upon completion of the new correctional
facility at the site of the Waiawa correctional facility, the department of
public safety shall relocate the operations of the Oahu community correctional
center to the vacated site of the Halawa correctional facility.

     (c)  The new facility shall:

     (1)  Be
operated by public employees;

     (2)  Provide
a range of custody levels, including community custody, minimum-security, and
maximum-security;

     (3)  Be
designed to appropriately house inmates in units reflecting their custody
levels; and

     (4)  Include
opportunities for counseling, vocational training, and education for inmates.

SECTION 3.  The
department of public safety may enter into:

     (1)  A public-private partnership to plan, design, and
construct the new correctional facility at the site of the Waiawa correctional
facility; and

     (2)  A lease-option contract with any private owner of
the new correctional facility at the site of the Waiawa correctional facility
to rent the facility for a set amount of time before exercising the option to
purchase the facility when or before the lease expires.

     SECTION 4.  The director of public safety shall
submit a report to the legislature at least twenty days prior to the convening
of the regular session of 2018, of the director's findings and recommendations,
including:

     (1)  A list of proposals with total costs for the
purchase or construction of a three thousand-bed correctional facility at the
site of the Waiawa correctional facility in accordance with this Act;

     (2)  The feasibility of:

         (A)  Relocating the operations of the Oahu
community correctional center to the vacated site of the Halawa correctional
facility;

         (B)  Entering into a public-private partnership
to plan, design, and construct the new correctional facility at the site of the
Waiawa correctional facility; and

         (C)  Entering into a lease-option contract with
any private owner of the new correctional facility at the site of the Waiawa
correctional facility to rent the facility for a set amount of time before
exercising the option to purchase the facility when or before the lease
expires; and

     (3)  Any proposed legislation, any funding requests,
and any other relevant information that the director of public safety deems
necessary to implement this Act.

     SECTION 5.  The department of public safety shall
suspend the current environmental impact statement process for its short list
of four potential sites for the proposed Oahu community correctional center
until the department of public safety:

     (1)  Considers
alternative sites of 4.5 acres in size or larger and provides a list of
alternative sites and the reasons for adding or omitting the alternative sites
from consideration as potential sites for the proposed Oahu community
correctional center;

     (2)  Consults
with the task force created by house concurrent resolution no. 85 (2016) and
the corrections population management commission about the appropriate capacity
and design of the proposed Oahu community correctional center in view of
changes to the criminal justice system in areas of pre-trial diversion
programs, expansion of Hawaii's Opportunity Probation with Enforcement (HOPE)
program and other probation programs, expansion of work furlough, and the use
of other alternatives to incarceration programs; and

     (3)  Provides
a report with respect to paragraphs (1) and (2) to the legislature no less than
twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2018.

     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2099.

 

