

    SECTION 1. The legislature finds that the Hawaii
hurricane relief fund is responsible for developing a comprehensive loss
reduction plan for the hurricane peril that includes standards for residential
and commercial structures and a timetable
for the implementation of mandatory mitigation measures, pursuant to section 431P-12,
Hawaii Revised Statutes.

     The legislature
further finds that the state building code council, created in 2007, was
required to adopt a comprehensive state building code that included the latest
editions of nationally recognized building codes and standards for the State of
Hawaii.  When nationally recognized building codes are updated every three
years, the state building code council amends the Hawaii Administrative Rules
pertaining to the building code.  The process of amending the rules can typically
cost between $75,000 and $100,000.

     Pursuant to part
II of chapter 107, Hawaii Revised Statutes, the state building code council is
also responsible for establishing residential and hurricane resistant standards
related to loss mitigation standards in accordance with section 431P-12, Hawaii
Revised Statutes.  However, the staff and operating expenses of the council have
never been funded, thus limiting the council's ability to carry out its
responsibilities and resulting in existing standards that do not meet federal
requirements for receiving post-disaster aid.  Specifically, a condition for
receiving assistance from the Federal Emergency Management Agency is that the repair,
replacement, or construction of buildings located in hazard-prone areas must at
the very least conform to the hazard-resistant standards referenced in the most
recent edition of the model building code as of the disaster declaration date.

     The legislature
also finds that the vulnerability of Hawaii buildings to hurricanes directly
affects the insurance industry and the
availability and cost of hurricane insurance to property owners.  Therefore,
mitigation of future hurricane losses has a direct benefit to the
sustainability of the Hawaii hurricane relief fund and the housing and
commercial real estate markets.

     The legislature
believes that it is in the State's interest to clarify the relationship between
the Hawaii hurricane relief fund and the
state building code council to effectively implement the loss mitigation
standards relating to the hurricane peril.  Clarifying section 431P-12, Hawaii
Revised Statutes, will allow the Hawaii hurricane relief fund and the state
building code council to simultaneously carry out their responsibilities, protect
the health and safety of the public, and mitigate future losses from the
hurricane peril.

     The purpose of this Act is to clarify that the
comprehensive loss reduction plan of the Hawaii hurricane relief fund shall
include implementing building code requirements for hurricane standards in
accordance with state building code and design standards.

     SECTION 2.  Section 431P-12, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended to read as follows:

     "[[]ยง431P-12[]]  Mitigation. 
The fund shall develop and provide for the implementation of a
comprehensive loss reduction plan for the hurricane peril.  The plan shall
include, and the fund shall sponsor, the development and implementation of
state and county building code hurricane standards for new residential and
commercial structures and separate hurricane standards for existing
residential and commercial structures.  The plan shall [provide a timetable
for implementation of] include funding to support the adoption of
administrative rules to implement the building code and design standards of
part 2 of chapter 107 and to implement mandatory loss mitigation measures
for both new and existing structures."

     SECTION 3.  Statutory material to be repealed
is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.

     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2050.

