

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that Act 241,
Session Laws of Hawaii 2015, established a regulatory system for medical
marijuana dispensaries that was codified as chapter 329D, Hawaii Revised
Statutes.  Pursuant to Act 241, the department of health began administering
the medical marijuana dispensary program in 2016.  Dispensaries may begin to
dispense medical marijuana and manufactured medical marijuana products in 2017
with departmental approval.  

     The legislature further finds that the medical marijuana dispensary task force
recommended policies and procedures for the establishment of medical marijuana
dispensaries.  However, a minority group of the task force expressed many
concerns about the safety of marijuana and manufactured marijuana products that,
in their view, were not sufficiently addressed.  These concerns include
protecting adolescent brain development from impairment; preventing fetal alcohol
spectrum disorders, a range of lifelong disabilities among infants born to substance-using
mothers; and preventing and reducing injuries and deaths associated with
marijuana-impaired driving.

     According
to a 2015 study by the state of Colorado, entitled "Marijuana equivalency in
portion and dosage", the average potencies of products sold in Colorado
are approximately 17.1 per cent for cannabis flowers and 62.1 per cent for
marijuana extracts.  Furthermore, according to a 2015 study entitled
"Alcohol and drug treatment services: Hawaii 5-year trends
(2010-2014)", marijuana was the primary illicit substance used by the
majority of adolescents seventeen years old and younger seeking treatment (61.2
per cent), followed by alcohol (28.1 per cent).

     In addition, according to a "4P’s plus"
survey for Hawaii covering the years 2007 to 2015, 8.6 per cent of the women
surveyed reported that they had used marijuana a month before they knew they
were pregnant, and that 8.9 per cent reported that they had used any amount of
marijuana in the last month during a known pregnancy.

     Marijuana
can impair driving skills and increase the risk of accidents.  Tetrahydrocannabinol,
or THC, is the principal psychoactive constituent of marijuana.  A review of
fatality analysis reporting system data for Hawaii for the years 1991 to 2014 found
that driving fatalities involving those with THC in their systems increased
from 4.8 per cent to 14.9 per cent, or from twenty-eight fatalities to one
hundred fifty, since 2000, the year medical marijuana was legalized.  

     The
2016 surgeon general’s report on alcohol, drugs and health, entitled "Facing
addiction in America", states that because many manufactured marijuana
products are unregulated even in states that have legalized marijuana use,
users may not have accurate information about the dosage or potency of those
products.  This could lead to serious consequences such as hospitalizations for
psychosis and other overdose-related symptoms.

     Presently, section 329D-8, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, requires the department of health to establish and enforce standards
for laboratory-based testing of marijuana and manufactured marijuana products prior
to their sale.  The chemical profile of the required batch testing includes delta
9 tetrahydrocannabinol levels, among other compounds and contaminants.  Furthermore,
the University of Hawaii is authorized pursuant to section 304A-1865, Hawaii
Revised Statutes, to conduct testing and research regarding marijuana plant
cannabinoid content and concentration, purity of manufactured marijuana
products, or additional testing requested by the department of health.

     Accordingly, the purpose of this Act is to
protect the health and welfare of the general public by setting limits on the
potency of tetrahydrocannabinol in manufactured marijuana products sold in the
State, and to require public notification of the health risks associated with
the consumption of products containing potency levels of more than ten per cent.

     SECTION 2.  Section 329D-9, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (c) to read as follows:

     "(c)  A manufacturer of a manufactured
marijuana product shall calculate the equivalent physical weight of the
marijuana that is used to manufacture the product and shall make the
equivalency calculations available to the department and to a consumer of the
manufactured marijuana product[.]; provided that the potency level of
tetrahydrocannabinol contained within each manufactured marijuana product shall
not exceed twelve per cent."

     SECTION 3.  Section 329D-11, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:

     "(b)  Any capsule, lozenge, or pill
containing marijuana or its principal psychoactive constituent
tetrahydrocannabinol shall be packaged so that one dose, serving, or single
wrapped item contains no more than ten milligrams of tetrahydrocannabinol; provided
that the potency level of tetrahydrocannabinol contained in each manufactured
marijuana product shall not exceed twelve per cent; provided further that
no manufactured marijuana product that is sold in a pack of multiple doses,
servings, or single wrapped items, nor any containers of oils, shall contain
more than a total of one hundred milligrams of tetrahydrocannabinol per pack or
container.  The packaging of each manufactured marijuana product shall
include wording substantially similar to the following, in bold capital letters
that are not less than a fourteen-point font:

     "WARNING:  THE HEALTH IMPACTS OF
MARIJUANA WITH THC POTENCY LEVELS OF 10 PERCENT AND OVER ARE UNKNOWN.""

     SECTION 4.  Statutory material to be repealed
is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.

     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its
approval.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


