

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that Hawaii's
public schools are underfunded.  Compared to school districts of similar size
in other states, Hawaii ranks two hundred twenty-seventh in per-pupil funding
before adjusting for cost of living.  At $11,823 per student, Hawaii education
spending trails major private schools, which average $15,173 in per-pupil spending. 
Hawaii also ranks last nationally in capital improvement expenditures for
public schools, appropriating about $300 per pupil, compared to averages in
other states of $1,200 to $1,500.

     The legislature further finds that chronic
underfunding of public schools undermines the State's goal of providing a
quality education to all of Hawaii's children.  Specifically, insufficient
education funding results in delayed repairs to school facilities; overheated
classrooms; higher class sizes; a lack of adequate classroom supplies;
elimination of arts, career, and technical education courses; budget cuts for
special education and English language learner programs; and an increasing
number of vacant teacher positions throughout the State.

     The purpose of this Act is to propose amendments
to the Constitution of the State of Hawaii to advance the State's goal of
providing a quality education for the children of Hawaii by authorizing the
legislature to establish a surcharge on residential investment property and visitor
accommodations.

     SECTION 2.  Article VII, section 3, of the
Constitution of the State of Hawaii is amended to read as follows:

"TAXATION
AND FINANCE

     Section 3.  The taxing power shall be
reserved to the State, except so much thereof as may be delegated by the
legislature to the political subdivisions, and except that all functions,
powers and duties relating to the taxation of real property shall be exercised
exclusively by the counties, with the exception of the county of Kalawao[.];
provided that the legislature shall not be prohibited from establishing a
surcharge on residential investment property pursuant to Article X, Section
1.  The legislature shall have the power to apportion state revenues among
the several political subdivisions."

     SECTION 3.  Article X, section 1, of the
Constitution of the State of Hawaii is amended to read as follows:

"PUBLIC
EDUCATION

     Section 1.  The State shall [provide]
make sufficient sums available for the establishment, support and
control of a statewide system of quality public schools free from
sectarian control, a state university, public libraries and such other
educational institutions as may be deemed desirable, including physical
facilities therefor.  There shall be no discrimination in public educational
institutions because of race, religion, sex or ancestry; nor shall public funds
be appropriated for the support or benefit of any sectarian or nonsectarian
private educational institution, except that proceeds of special purpose
revenue bonds authorized or issued under section 12 of Article VII may be
appropriated to finance or assist:

     1.  Not-for-profit corporations that provide
early childhood education and care facilities serving the general public; and

     2.  Not-for-profit private nonsectarian and
sectarian elementary schools, secondary schools, colleges and universities.

     The legislature may establish, as provided
by law, a surcharge on residential investment property and visitor
accommodations to fund a quality public education for all of Hawaii's children."

     SECTION 4.  The question to be printed on the
ballot shall be as follows:

    "Shall
the legislature be authorized to establish, as provided by law, a surcharge on
residential investment property and visitor accommodations to fund a quality
public education for all of Hawaii's children?"

     SECTION 5.  Constitutional material to be
repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New constitutional material is
underscored.

     SECTION 6.  This amendment shall take effect
upon compliance with article XVII, section 3, of the Constitution of the State
of Hawaii.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


