

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 439, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by
adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:

     "§439-   
Citation for licensee or permittee violations; fines.  (a)  In
addition to any other remedy available under this chapter, the department may
issue a citation to any person who holds a beauty operator, beauty instructor,
beauty shop, or beauty school license, or a temporary or beauty apprentice
permit, for any of the following violations of this chapter or the rules
adopted pursuant to this chapter and chapter 91:

     (1)  Failure
of a beauty operator, beauty instructor, beauty shop, beauty school, beauty
apprentice, or temporary permittee engaged in the practice of cosmetology to
display a license or permit in a conspicuous place in the office, place of
business or employment, or school, during all hours of operation;

     (2)  Failure
of a beauty shop owner or beauty school to ensure that only individuals who
hold a current and appropriate license or permit engage in the practice of
cosmetology in the beauty shop or beauty school;

     (3)  Failure
of a beauty shop engaged in the practice of cosmetology to conspicuously
display, in all reception and work rooms, a sign that shall read "PRICE
LIST AVAILABLE UPON REQUEST" in capital letters at least three-fourths
inch in size;

     (4)  Failure
of a beauty school to identify each instructor-trainee at the beauty school
with a name tag, stating that person's full name and the words
"Instructor-trainee", to be worn during all hours of instruction;

     (5)  Failure
of a beauty school to identify each instructor at the beauty school with a name
tag, stating that person's full name, the word "Instructor", and
identifying the instructor's appropriate beauty operator category, to be worn
during all hours of instruction;

     (6)  Failure
of a beauty school, during all hours of instruction, to operate the beauty
school with an instructor-student ratio of one instructor for every twenty-five
students, or with a minimum of two licensed instructors; or

     (7)  Failure
of a beauty school performing work upon or for members of the public to display,
in a conspicuous place in each reception and work room, a sign not less than eighteen
inches by twenty-four inches in size that shall state "School of Beauty
Culture – Work done by students under supervision" in letters not less
than one-half inch high.

     (b)  Each
citation:

     (1)  Shall be
in writing and describe the basis of the citation, including the specific
statute or rule violated;

     (2)  May
contain an order of abatement and the assessment of a fine in the amount of
$100 for each violation;

     (3)  Shall be
served on the licensee or permittee by personal service; and

     (4)  Shall
inform the licensee or permittee that the licensee or permittee may submit a
written request to the board or its designee for a hearing to contest the
citation, within twenty calendar days from the service of the citation.

     (c)  If the
licensee or permittee timely submits a written request to the board or its
designee for a hearing, the board may designate a hearings officer to conduct
the hearing in accordance with chapter 91.

     (d)  If the
licensee or permittee does not timely submit a written request to the board or
its designee for a hearing, the citation shall be deemed a final order of the
board.

     (e)  Failure
of a licensee or permittee to pay any assessed fine within thirty calendar
days, unless the licensee or permittee contests the citation, may result in
further disciplinary action taken by the board."

     SECTION 2.  This Act does not affect rights and duties that
matured, penalties that were incurred, and proceedings that were begun before
its effective date.

     SECTION 3.  New
statutory material is underscored.

     SECTION 4.  This
Act shall take effect on July 1, 2090.

