

     SECTION 1.  The legislature acknowledges that
adult, terminally ill individuals have a fundamental right to determine their
own medical treatment options as they near the end of life.  Advances in
technology are such that the process of dying can be extended even when no cure
or likelihood of successful medical intervention exists.  This can often result
in terminally ill patients undergoing unremitting pain, discomfort, and an
irreversible reduction in their quality of life in their final days.  

     Currently in Hawaii, patients who are
terminally ill and mentally capable have limited options to end their suffering
if the dying process becomes unbearable.  Palliative care, VSED (voluntarily
stopping eating and drinking), or stopping artificial ventilation or other
life-sustaining therapy to advance the dying process are all options a dying
individual can choose.  However, physicians do not always offer these options
to their patients, and more importantly, these options do not always result in
a quick or peaceful death.

     "Medical aid in dying" describes a
medical practice defined by established standards of care.  It is
well-recognized that medical aid in dying can ease the unnecessary suffering of
individuals by providing a measure of control over the progression of a
terminal illness and provide a safe, compassionate alternative to what
terminally ill patients describe as unbearable pain, suffering, and loss of
autonomy in their final days.  Medical aid in dying has been the law in Oregon
for twenty years, and since implementation, the quality of end-of-life care,
pain management, and the use of hospice have all greatly improved.  Data from
Oregon also demonstrate that there have been no abuses of the law, and in
contrast to the fears of opponents, the elderly, disabled, and uninsured have
not been negatively impacted by the use of aid in dying.  The availability of
medical aid in dying provides comfort to terminally ill individuals even when
they ultimately choose not to self-administer the medication.

     A growing body of scholarly research on medical
aid-in-dying practice demonstrates the utility and safety of the practice of
upholding an individual's right to self-determination.  Five states now
authorize medical aid in dying, including Oregon, Washington, Montana, Vermont,
and California.  Over twenty states are currently considering legislation to
authorize the practice.  Therefore, it is the intent of the legislature to:

     (1)  Ensure that mentally capable, terminally ill
adults in Hawaii who choose to do so are able to take advantage of medical aid
in dying medication to facilitate a peaceful death; and

     (2)  Ensure that physicians who assist patients in
obtaining aid in dying medication are not subject to civil or criminal
liability for participating in good faith compliance with this Act.

     SECTION 2.  This Act shall be known and may be
cited as the Hawaii Patient Choice at End of Life Act of 2017.

     SECTION 3.  The Hawaii Revised Statutes is
amended by adding a new chapter to be appropriately designated and to read as
follows:

"Chapter

HAWAII
PATIENT CHOICE AT END OF LIFE ACT

     §   -1  Definitions.  As used in this
chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

     "Adult" means an individual who is
eighteen years of age or older.

     "Attending physician" means a person
who:

     (1)  Is authorized to practice medicine or osteopathic
medicine under chapter 453; 

     (2)  Has primary responsibility for the patient's
healthcare and treatment of their terminal illness; and 

     (3)  Routinely provides medical care to patients with
advanced and terminal illnesses in the normal course of their medical practice,
which may include the provision of medical care other than medical aid in
dying.

     "Capacity" means an individual's
ability to understand the significant benefits, risks, and alternatives to
proposed healthcare and to make and communicate an informed healthcare
decision.

     "Healthcare provider" means an
individual licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized or permitted by law to
provide healthcare in the ordinary course of business or practice of a
profession.

     "Informed healthcare decision" means
a decision by an individual to request a prescription for medical aid in dying
based on an understanding and acknowledgement of the relevant facts and that is
made after being fully informed by the individual's attending physician of:

     (1)  The individual's medical diagnosis;

     (2)  The individual's prognosis;

     (3)  The potential risks associated with taking the
medication to be prescribed;

     (4)  The probable result of taking the medication to
be prescribed;

     (5)  The possibility that the individual may not
choose to obtain the medication, or may obtain the medication but may decide
not to take it; and 

     (6)  The feasible alternatives or additional treatment
opportunities available to the individual, including hospice and palliative
care.

     "Medical aid in dying" means the
medical practice of an attending physician prescribing medication to a qualified
individual.

     "Qualified individual" means a
terminally ill adult with the capacity to make an informed healthcare decision
to self-administer the medication prescribed by medical aid in dying to bring
about a peaceful death if the individual so chooses.

     "Self-administration" means a
qualified individual's affirmative, conscious, and physical act of
administering medication prescribed by medical aid in dying to bring about the
individual's own death.

     "Terminally ill" means the final
stage of an incurable or irreversible medical condition that has been medically
confirmed and will, within reasonable medical judgment, result in death within
six months.

     §   -2  Medical aid in dying specifically
authorized.  A qualified individual may request a prescription for medical
aid in dying from their attending physician and may obtain medication that the
individual may choose to self-administer to bring about a peaceful death.

     §   -3  Standard of care.  (a)  Medical
aid in dying, as well as information related to medical aid in dying, shall be
provided consistent with this chapter and the current standard of care for
medical aid in dying.

     (b)  No healthcare provider shall intentionally
mislead an individual, with an affirmative statement or by omission, regarding
the existence of medical aid in dying as a lawful medical practice in this State.

     (c)  No healthcare provider shall punish,
retaliate, or otherwise discipline another healthcare provider for refusing to
violate subsection (b).

     §   -4  Effects on related statutes.  (a)
 Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize a healthcare provider
to end an individual’s life by euthanasia.

     (b)  This chapter does not limit or otherwise
affect the provision, administration, or receipt of palliative sedation
consistent with the current medical standard of care.

     (c)  Medical aid in dying that occurs in
accordance with this chapter shall not be construed for any purpose to
constitute suicide, assisted suicide, or homicide under the law.

     (d)  A qualified individual's good faith use of
medication prescribed by medical aid in dying shall not, by itself, trigger a
coroner's or deputy coroner's duty to perform an inquest.  Subsection (c) shall
not be construed to conflict with section 841-3.

     (e)  The cause of death listed on death
certificates of qualified individuals who avail themselves of medical aid in
dying shall be the individual’s underlying terminal illness.

     (f)  Seeking or using medical aid in dying
shall not affect in any manner any contract, will, life insurance, health
insurance, accident insurance, annuity, or other agreement.

     (g)  A request by a qualified individual for,
or provision by an attending physician of, medication prescribed by medical aid
in dying in good faith compliance with this chapter shall not constitute
neglect or elder abuse for any purpose of law, or provide the basis for the
appointment of a guardian or conservator.

     (h)  A qualified individual who possesses or
self-administers medication prescribed by medical aid in dying consistent with
this chapter shall not, solely for these reasons, be considered a danger to one's
self as defined in section 334-1 or a person suffering from serious physical
harm under section 663-1.6.

     (i)  Healthcare providers and individuals shall
not be subject to civil or criminal liability for participating in good faith
compliance with this chapter, including an individual who is present when a qualified
individual self-administers the medication prescribed by medical aid in dying.

     (j)  A healthcare provider or professional
organization shall not subject an individual to censure, discipline,
suspension, loss of license, loss of privileges, loss of membership, or any
other penalty for participating in good faith compliance with this chapter or
for declining to participate.

     (k)  A healthcare provider who is unable or
unwilling to comply with a qualified individual's request for medical aid in
dying under this chapter shall cooperate in the transfer of the individual's
care to a participating provider so that the individual's request can be
evaluated in a neutral and unbiased manner.  If the individual transfers care
to a new healthcare provider, the prior healthcare provider shall immediately
transfer a copy of the individual’s relevant medical records to the new
healthcare provider.

     (l)  Purposely or knowingly coercing or
exerting undue influence on an individual to request medication for the purpose
of ending their life or to conceal a rescission of a request shall be punishable
as a class     felony."

     SECTION 4.  If any provision of this Act, or the application
thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the invalidity does not
affect other provisions or applications of the Act that can be given effect
without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of
this Act are severable.

     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its
approval.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


