

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that in the executive
office on aging reorganization of June 2015, the long-term care ombudsman program
was reduced in staff to only the director, making Hawaii the only state in the
country with a long-term care ombudsman program staff of one.  In 1995, a time
when most residents lived in nursing homes, the Institute of Medicine
recommended a minimum staffing ratio of one full-time paid ombudsman for every
two thousand long-term care residents.  Currently, Hawaii has over twelve
thousand long-term care residents, most of whom live in the community rather
than in nursing homes, which creates greater challenges.  Under the 1995 Institute
of Medicine recommendation, Hawaii should have a minimum of six full-time long-term
care ombudsmen.

     The legislature further finds that the
long-term care ombudsman program may utilize volunteers.  The long-term care
ombudsman program has certified close to one hundred eighty volunteers since
the volunteer component began in 2001, using considerable time and resources
for recruitment, training, and retention; however, as of 2016, there were only
eight ombudsman volunteers.  Furthermore, volunteers cannot substitute for a
full-time, highly trained, paid staff position.

     The legislature also finds that in addition to
visits to long-term care facilities, long-term care ombudsmen respond to a
multitude of complaints, engage in investigations, and provide information,
assistance, and referrals to long-term residents and their families.  As of 2016,
there were 1,405 long-term care facilities on Oahu, 40 facilities on Kauai, 70
facilities on Maui, and 187 facilities on Hawaii, for a total of 1,702
facilities statewide.  The long-term care ombudsman program lacks staff to
visit each facility on a quarterly basis, let alone facilitate resident and family
councils, provide more community education, and work more closely with neighbor
island county councils and the area agencies on aging.  The legislature
additionally finds that the long-term care ombudsman program requires resources
to ensure that the neighbor islands' kupuna and their families receive the same
equal access to the services provided by the long-term care ombudsman program
as Oahu has received since 1975.

     The purpose of this Act is to support the
long-term care ombudsman program on the island of Oahu and allocate funds for
contracted services through the office of the long-term care ombudsman in the
counties of Hawaii, Kauai, and Maui.

     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the
general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $150,000 or so much thereof
as may be necessary for fiscal year 2017-2018 and the same sum or so much
thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2018-2019 for the long-term care
ombudsman program to support the long-term care ombudsman program on the island
of Oahu and provide funding for contracted services through the office of the
long-term care ombudsman in the counties of Hawaii, Kauai, and Maui; provided
that the appropriation shall be distributed as follows:

     (1)  Office of the
long-term care ombudsman for the city and county of Honolulu           $75,000;

     (2)  Office of the
long-term care ombudsman for the county of Hawaii                      $25,000;

     (3)  Office of the
long-term care ombudsman for the county of Kauai                       $25,000;
and

     (4)  Office of the
long-term care ombudsman for the county of Maui                        $25,000.

     The sums appropriated shall be expended
by the executive office on aging for the purposes of this Act.

     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July
1, 2017.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


