

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that Hawaii's
law use law was enacted, as stated in Act 187, Session Laws of Hawaii 1961,
"to preserve, protect and encourage the development of the lands in the
State for those uses to which they are best suited for the public welfare . . .
."  Under the law, the land use commission groups contiguous land areas
into one of the four land use districts: urban, rural, agricultural, and
conservation.

     The legislature also finds that the Zoning
Enabling Act, contained in section 46-4, Hawaii Revised Statutes, directs that
future development of the counties be accomplished within the framework of a
long-range, comprehensive general plan.  The regulation of development within a
county is a county function, accomplished through the regulation of the use of
land through a zoning ordinance, which is valid as long as it does not conflict
with the land use law, which is a law of statewide concern.

     In establishing or regulating districts, the
counties: 

     (1)  Are required, pursuant to section 46-4, Hawaii
Revised Statutes, to give "full consideration" to "all available
data relating to soil classification and physical capabilities of the land to
allow and encourage the most beneficial use of the land consonant with good
zoning practices"; and

     (2)  Hold public hearings on proposals to adopt or
amend the county general plan, development plans, and zoning ordinances.

     The legislature further finds that reparations
of the county general plan and development plans provide the opportunity for the
receipt of input from all governmental and non-governmental agencies and the
general public; and the discovery of any problems relating to the future
development of the county.

     The legislature intends for this Act to serve
as an acknowledgement of the time spent and the efforts made by the counties in
developing their general and development plans.

     The purpose of this Act is to:

     (1)  Authorize the counties to petition the land use
commission for regional boundary amendments required by the adoption of the
county general plan or development plans; and

     (2)  Require the land use commission to conduct the
five-year boundary review.

     SECTION 2.  Section 205-3.1, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended to read as follows:

     "ยง205-3.1  Amendments to district
boundaries.  (a)  District boundary amendments involving lands in the
conservation district, land areas greater than fifteen acres, or lands
delineated as important agricultural lands shall be processed by the land use
commission pursuant to section 205-4.

     (b)  Any department or agency of the State, and
department or agency of the county in which the land is situated, or any person
with a property interest in the land sought to be reclassified may petition the
appropriate county land use decision-making authority of the county in which
the land is situated for a change in the boundary of a district involving lands
less than fifteen acres presently in the rural and urban districts and lands
less than fifteen acres in the agricultural district that are not designated as
important agricultural lands.

     (c)  District boundary amendments involving
land areas of fifteen acres or less, except as provided in subsection (b),
shall be determined by the appropriate county land use decision-making
authority for the district and shall not require consideration by the land use
commission pursuant to section 205-4; provided that such boundary amendments
and approved uses are consistent with this chapter.  The appropriate county
land use decision-making authority may consolidate proceedings to amend state
land use district boundaries pursuant to this subsection, with county
proceedings to amend the general plan, development plan, zoning of the affected
land, or such other proceedings.  Appropriate ordinances and rules to allow
consolidation of such proceedings may be developed by the county land use
decision-making authority.

     (d)  The county land use decision-making
authority shall serve a copy of the application for a district boundary
amendment to the land use commission and the department of business, economic
development, and tourism and shall notify the commission and the department of
the time and place of the hearing and the proposed amendments scheduled to be
heard at the hearing.  A change in the state land use district boundaries
pursuant to this subsection shall become effective on the day designated by the
county land use decision-making authority in its decision.  Within sixty days
of the effective date of any decision to amend state land use district
boundaries by the county land use decision-making authority, the decision and
the description and map of the affected property shall be transmitted to the
land use commission and the department of business, economic development, and
tourism by the county planning director. 

     (e)  After the adoption its amended general
plan and development plans and approval by the mayor, the county land use
decision-making authority may petition the land use commission for approval of
any land use boundary amendments required by the amended general plan or
development plans."

     SECTION 3.  Section 205-18, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended to read as follows:

     "ยง205-18  Periodic review of districts. 
The [office of planning] commission shall undertake a review of
the classification and districting of all lands in the State, within five years
from December 31, [1985,] 2016, and every fifth year
thereafter.  The [office,] commission, in its five-year boundary
review, shall focus its efforts on reviewing the Hawaii state plan, county
general plans, and county development and community plans.  Upon completion of
the five- year boundary review, the [office shall submit a report of the
findings to the] commission[.  The office] may initiate state land
use boundary amendments [which] that it deems appropriate to
conform to these plans.  The [office] commission may seek
assistance of appropriate state and county agencies and may employ consultants
and undertake studies in making this review."

     SECTION 4.  Statutory material to be repealed
is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.

     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2017.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


