

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that there is
value in grassroots input in planning improvements at the neighborhood level. 
Moreover, it is at the small scale level that residents and businesses find the
most relevance in participating in the upgrade of their neighborhoods in the
areas of economic revitalization, infrastructure improvements, and housing. 
The legislature also recognizes that a collaborative approach amongst major
stakeholders is more effective than individual efforts.  Therefore, the purpose
of this Act is to establish neighborhood revitalization boards as a new type of
planning and implementation approach to foster collaborative neighborhood
revitalization strategies adopted by the State, counties, and local
stakeholders.

     SECTION 2.  The Hawaii Revised Statutes is
amended by adding a new chapter to be appropriately designated and to read as
follows:

"Chapter

NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION BOARDS

     §   -1  Neighborhood
revitalization boards; established.  (a)  The councils of each county may
establish by resolution one neighborhood revitalization board for each neighborhood
revitalization area within the county; provided that there shall not be more
than three boards established in any one county.

     (b)  In determining the areas in which to
create neighborhood revitalization boards, the county councils shall give
preference to those neighborhoods that:

     (1)  Include areas that are under the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development neighborhood revitalization
strategy area program;

     (2)  Have already adopted a revitalization plan; or 

     (3)  Have an existing or planned transit center that
can influence economic revitalization and affordable housing in the
neighborhood.

     (c)  The county councils may establish the
neighborhood revitalization boards as independent agencies within existing
county agencies or departments.

     §   -2  Size; composition of
members; staff.  (a)  The size of each neighborhood revitalization board
shall be determined by the county councils; provided that each neighborhood
revitalization board shall consist of at least three members of the public appointed
by the county councils, each of whom shall reside within the census-designated
place in which the board is being established, and one member from an
appropriate county agency or department to be designated by the council as an
ex officio member; provided further that among the public board members there
shall be appointed at least one business owner and one homeowner from the area
the board represents.

     (b)  The county councils may allow the
neighborhood revitalization boards to hire their own staff, or the county councils
may assign staff from designated county agencies or departments to the boards.

     §   -3  Powers.  The
neighborhood revitalization boards shall have the power to:

     (1)  Submit requests for funding from the county councils,
state legislature, and United States Congress;

     (2)  Approve neighborhood revitalization plans prior
to the submittal of those plans to the county council for adoption;

     (3)  Comment on proposed policies and regulations that
affect the board's neighborhood and neighborhood revitalization plan; and

     (4)  Advocate for the board's neighborhood and for the
implementation of the board's revitalization plan.

     §   -4  Neighborhood
revitalization plans.  (a)  The neighborhood revitalization boards shall
develop neighborhood revitalization plans, which shall include but not be
limited to the following:

     (1)  An overall statement of the objectives of the
plan;

     (2)  The neighborhood boundaries;

     (3)  An assessment of the existing conditions that
brought about the need for the plan;

     (4)  Delineation of specific projects to achieve the
plan's stated objectives, including estimated costs and times needed for
completion; and

     (5)  Demonstration that the plan and projects comply
with county long-range plans and other applicable county and state plans, such
as neighborhood transit-oriented development plans.

A neighborhood revitalization plan may also include recommended
changes to zoning and other regulatory laws.

     (b)  Projects included in a neighborhood revitalization
plan may include public sector projects and private or non-profit projects that
fulfill the plan's stated objectives and compliment and strengthen public
sector initiatives.

     (c)  The neighborhood revitalization plan
preparation process shall allow for participation and input from stakeholders
and the public.

     §   -5  County matching
funds.  Each county shall provide at least twenty per cent matching funds
for any neighborhood revitalization plan or project for which the State
provides funds.  The matching funds may be applied to the development of the
plan itself and to projects and actions that implement the plan, including land
acquisition, planning and design studies, infrastructure or project
construction, and administrative costs."

     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July
1, 2017.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


