

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that
automatic voter registration, also known as "motor voter", provides
eligible voters an opportunity to register to vote when applying for or
renewing a driver's license unless the eligible voter affirmatively declines to
be registered.  As of May 2016, five states have authorized automatic voter
registration, including California, Connecticut, Oregon, Vermont, and West
Virginia.

     Proponents believe that automatic voter
registration assists in removing barriers to registration for eligible voters,
which is the first step to voter participation.  Voter registration through a
routine and necessary transaction, such as driver's licensing, increases voter
registration efficiency and effectiveness and voter turnout.

     The purpose of this Act is to establish an
automatic voter registration system to allow any person who is eligible to vote
but not already registered to vote and applies for a new or renewed motor
vehicle driver's license, provisional license, or instruction permit, or a new,
renewed, or duplicate identification card to be automatically registered to
vote unless the applicant affirmatively declines to be registered to vote.

     SECTION 2.  Chapter 11, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended
by adding a new section to part II to be appropriately designated and to read
as follows:

     "§11-    Automatic
registration.  (a)  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, an
affidavit on an application for voter registration shall be a part of the
application associated with the issuance of an identification card under
section 286-301 and a driver's license under section 286-109.  Each application
shall include a space to request a permanent absentee ballot.

     (b)  Applications for an identification card
or driver's license shall not be processed until the applicant either clearly
indicates on the application that the applicant declines to register to vote or
completes the portion of the application related to voter registration.  Unless
an applicant affirmatively declines to be registered to vote, the submission of
the application shall be deemed to authorize the examiner of drivers to collect
and transmit the information necessary to register the applicant as a voter,
and the examiner of drivers shall electronically transmit the necessary
information to the clerk of the county in which the applicant resides and
election officials and the statewide voter registration system pursuant to
subsection (d).  The examiner of drivers shall not transmit any information
necessary to register an applicant as a voter if that applicant affirmatively
declines to be registered to vote.

     (c)  Upon receipt of the completed voter
registration application transmitted from the examiner of drivers, the clerk
shall review and either approve or reject the voter registration application in
accordance with this part; provided that approved voter registration
applications received from the examiner of drivers pursuant to this section
shall be treated as having a valid signature for purposes of section 11‑15(c)
whether transmitted electronically or by facsimile transmission.  Upon approval
of the voter registration application, the clerk shall proceed to number the
application and register the name of the voter in the general county register
as provided in section 11‑14.

     (d)  Databases maintained or operated by the
counties or the department of transportation containing driver's license or
identification card information, including any documents or images, shall be
directly accessible and provided electronically to election officials and the
statewide voter registration system to allow for the timely processing of voter
applications, ensure the integrity of the voter registration polls, and for any
other government purpose, as determined by the chief election officer.

     (e)  For purposes of this section,
"applicant" means a person who is eligible to vote but is not
registered to vote."

     SECTION 3.  Chapter 286, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended
by adding a new section to part VI to be appropriately designated and to read
as follows:

     "§286-A  Voter
registration.  (a)  A qualified applicant for a new or renewed motor
vehicle driver's license, provisional license, or instruction permit shall
automatically be registered to vote with the clerk of the appropriate county
upon completion of the license or permit application as required in section 11‑  
unless the applicant affirmatively declines, on the application form, to be
registered to vote.

     (b)  Unless an applicant affirmatively
declines to be registered to vote, the submission of the application shall be
deemed to authorize the examiner of drivers to collect and transmit the
information necessary to register the applicant as a voter, and the examiner of
drivers shall electronically transmit the necessary information to the clerk of
the county in which the applicant resides and election officials and the
statewide voter registration system pursuant to section 11‑  (d). 
The examiner of drivers shall not transmit any information necessary to
register an applicant as a voter if that applicant affirmatively declines to
vote.

     (c)  For the purposes of this section, "qualified
applicant" means a person who is eligible to vote but is not registered to
vote."

     SECTION 4.  Chapter 286, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended
by adding a new section to part XVI to be appropriately designated and to read
as follows:

     "§286-B  Voter
registration.  (a)  A qualified applicant for a new, renewed, or
duplicate identification card shall automatically be registered to vote with
the clerk of the appropriate county upon completion of an application for
identification card as required by section 11-   unless the applicant
affirmatively declines, on the application form, to be registered to vote.

     (b)  Unless an applicant affirmatively
declines to be registered to vote, the submission of the application shall be
deemed to authorize the examiner of drivers to collect and transmit the
information necessary to register the applicant as a voter, and the examiner of
drivers shall electronically transmit the necessary information to the clerk of
the county in which the applicant resides and election officials and the
statewide voter registration system pursuant to section 11‑  (d). 
The examiner of drivers shall not transmit any information necessary to
register an applicant as a voter if that applicant affirmatively declines to vote.

     (c)  For the purposes of this section,
"qualified applicant" means a person who is eligible to vote but is
not registered to vote."

     SECTION 5.  Section 286-108, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is
amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:

     "(a)  Except as provided in section
286-107.5(a), the examiner of drivers shall examine every applicant for a
driver's license, except as otherwise provided in this part.  The examination
shall include a test of:

     (1)  The applicant's eyesight and any further physical
examination that the examiner of drivers finds necessary to determine the
applicant's fitness to operate a motor vehicle safely upon the highways;

     (2)  The applicant's ability to understand highway
signs regulating, warning, and directing traffic;

     (3)  The applicant's knowledge of the rules of the
road based on the traffic laws of the State and the traffic ordinances of the
county where the applicant resides or intends to operate a motor vehicle; provided
that the examination shall specifically test the applicant's knowledge of [the
provisions of section] sections 291C-121.5 and [section]
291C-137; and

     (4)  The actual demonstration of ability to exercise
ordinary and reasonable control in the operation of a motor vehicle.

The examinations shall be appropriate to the
operation of the category of motor vehicle for which the applicant seeks to be
licensed and shall be conducted as required by the director.

     The examiner of drivers shall require every
applicant to comply with section 286-102.5.

     The examiner of drivers may waive the actual
demonstration of ability to operate a motorcycle or motor scooter for any
person who furnishes evidence, to the satisfaction of the examiner of drivers,
that the person has completed the motorcycle education course approved by the
director in accordance with section 431:10G-104.

     [At the time of examination, an application
for voter registration by mail shall be made available to every applicant for a
driver's license.]

     For the purposes of this section, the term
"applicant" does not include any person reactivating a license under
section 286‑107.5(a)."

     SECTION 6.  Section 286-109, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is
amended to read as follows:

     "§286-109  General provision governing
the issuance of licenses.  (a)  Upon payment of the required fee and upon
demonstrating the ability to operate a certain category or categories of motor
vehicles to the satisfaction of the examiner of drivers, an applicant for a
driver's license shall be issued a single license of a design approved by the
director [of transportation] upon which is made a notation of:

     (1)  The category or categories of motor vehicles the
applicant may operate;

     (2)  Any restrictive provisions to which the license
is subject;

     (3)  Veteran status, if desired by the applicant;
provided that the notation shall be on the front of the license and shall not
include any designation other than the term "veteran"; and

     (4)  When the license is issued to a person under
twenty-one years of age, a statement, in clearly legible print that shall
contrast with the other information appearing on the license, which indicates
the date on which the person will attain the age of twenty-one years.

As used in this subsection, "veteran"
means any person who served in any of the uniformed services of the United
States, including veterans of the Korean conflict and persons who served in the
armed forces of the Republic of Korea, who fought under the command of the
United Nations led by the United States, during the Korean conflict and are
currently United States citizens, and was discharged under conditions other
than dishonorable.

     (b)  The examiner of drivers shall not issue or
renew any driver's license using the driver's social security number on the
driver's license.

     (c)  Statutes of limitations and other
provisions of this chapter notwithstanding, no driver's license or instruction
permit shall be issued or renewed under this section, where the examiner of
drivers is notified by the district judge, traffic violations bureaus of the
district courts, or the judge of the circuit court that the applicant has
failed to respond to a traffic citation or summons, or failed to appear in
court after an arrest for the violation of any traffic laws of a county, this
chapter or chapter 286G, 287, 290, 291, or 291C, or of any motor vehicle
insurance laws under article 10C of chapter 431, or of any motorcycle or motor
scooter insurance laws under article 10G of chapter 431, and the same remains
delinquent and outstanding, or the applicant, has as of the time of the
application, failed to comply in full with all orders of the court; provided
that the district court with whose order an applicant has failed to comply in
full, may approve the issuance or renewal of a driver's license or instruction
permit other than a commercial driver's license upon conditions imposed by the
court for the satisfaction of the outstanding court order and any other
conditions as may be imposed by the court, if one or more of the following
conditions are met:

     (1)  The applicant is gainfully employed in a position
that requires driving and will be discharged if the applicant is unable to
drive; or

     (2)  The applicant has no access to alternative
transportation and therefore must drive to work;

provided further that if the applicant has failed to
comply in full with orders of the district court of more than one circuit, the
applicant shall obtain the approval of the district court of each circuit in
which the applicant has an outstanding court order before a driver's license or
instruction permit may be issued or renewed under this subsection.

     A driver's license or instruction permit issued
or renewed under this subsection shall be subject to immediate suspension by
the court upon the applicant's failure to remain in full compliance with all
conditions imposed by the court for the issuance or renewal of the driver's
license or instruction permit.  The examiner of drivers may place an indication
of restriction upon a driver's license or instruction permit issued or renewed
under this subsection.  Proof of financial responsibility under section 287-20
shall not apply to the issuance or renewal of driver's licenses or instruction
permits under this subsection.

     (d)  An application for a driver's license
shall include the information required under section 11-  ."

     SECTION 7.  Section 286-301, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is
amended to read as follows:

     "[[]§286-301[]] 
Issuance of identification card or temporary card.  (a)  To obtain an
identification card from the examiner of drivers, an individual shall complete
an application pursuant to section 286-303.

     (b)  The examiner of drivers, upon receipt of
the application by any individual who is a resident or a temporary resident of
this State, shall issue an identification card to that individual upon receipt
of any appropriate fee established pursuant to section 286-309.

     (c)  The identification card shall be similar
in size, shape, and design to a driver's license, but shall not entitle the
individual to whom it is issued to operate a motor vehicle.

     (d)  The issuance of an identification card
pursuant to this section shall not place upon the State of Hawaii or any agency
any liability for the misuse or the acceptance of the identification card as
valid identification, which shall be left entirely to the discretion of any
individual to whom such card is presented.

     (e)  An application for an identification
card from the examiner of drivers shall include the information required under
section 11-  ."

     SECTION 8.  Section 286-311, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is
amended by amending its title and subsection (a) to read as follows:

     "[[]§286-311[]] 
Custody and use of records; confidential information.  (a)  [All]
Except for purposes of sections 286-A, 286-B, 286-109, and 286-301,
information and records acquired by the examiner of drivers under this part
shall be confidential.  All information and records shall be maintained in an
appropriate form and in an appropriate office in the custody and under the
control of the examiner.  The information shall be available only to authorized
individuals under such restrictions as the director shall prescribe.  The
examiner may dispose of any application or identification card, or information
or record relating to the application or identification card, which does not include
a social security number, without regard to chapter 94, whenever, in the
examiner's discretion, retention of the information or record is no longer
required or practicable."

     SECTION 9.  In codifying the new sections added by sections
3 and 4 of this Act, the revisor of statutes shall substitute appropriate
section numbers for the letters used in designating the new sections in this
Act.

     SECTION 10.  Statutory material to be repealed is
bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.

     SECTION 11.  This Act shall take effect upon its
approval.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


