

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the
unscrupulous practices of bid shopping and bid peddling still plague Hawaii's
construction industry.  The state of Washington prohibits bid shopping and bid
peddling and affords subcontractors affected by those practices a legal means
of redress.  To further curb undesirable bid shopping and bid peddling
practices in public works, the purpose of this Act is to incorporate the
Washington state model into Hawaii law.

     SECTION 2.  Section 103D-302, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended to read as follows:

     "ยง103D-302  Competitive sealed bidding. 
(a)  Contracts shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding except as
otherwise provided in section 103D-301.  Awards of contracts by competitive
sealed bidding may be made after single or multi-step bidding.  Competitive
sealed bidding does not include negotiations with bidders after the receipt and
opening of bids.  Award is based on the criteria set forth in the invitation
for bids.

     (b)  An invitation for bids shall be issued,
and shall include a purchase description and all contractual terms and
conditions applicable to the procurement.  If the invitation for bids is for
construction, it shall specify that all bids include the name of each person or
firm to be engaged by the bidder as a joint contractor or subcontractor in the
performance of the contract and the nature and scope of the work to be
performed by each.  Construction bids that do not comply with this requirement
may be accepted if acceptance is in the best interest of the State and the
value of the work to be performed by the joint contractor or subcontractor is
equal to or less than one per cent of the total bid amount.

     (c)  Adequate public notice of the invitation
for bids shall be given a reasonable time before the date set forth in the
invitation for the opening of bids.  The policy board shall adopt rules which
specify:

     (1)  The form that the notice is to take;

     (2)  What constitutes a reasonable interim between
publication and bid opening; and

     (3)  How notice may be published, including
publication in a newspaper of general circulation, notice by mail to all
persons on any applicable bidders mailing list, publication by any public or
private telecommunication information network, or any other method of
publication it deems to be effective.

     (d)  Bids shall be opened publicly in the
presence of one or more witnesses, at the time and place designated in the
invitation for bids.  The amount of each bid and other relevant information
specified by rule, together with the name of each bidder shall be recorded. 
The record and each bid shall be open to public inspection.

     (e)  Bids shall be unconditionally accepted
without alteration or correction, except as authorized in this chapter or by
rules adopted by the policy board.

     (f)  Bids shall be evaluated based on the
requirements set forth in the invitation for bids.  These requirements may
include criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, testing,
quality, workmanship, delivery, and suitability for a particular purpose. 
Those criteria that will affect the bid price and be considered in evaluation
for award shall be objectively measurable, such as discounts, transportation
costs, and total or life cycle costs.  The invitation for bids shall set forth
the evaluation criteria to be used.  No criteria may be used in bid evaluation
that are not set forth in the invitation for bids.

     (g)  Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently
erroneous bids before or after award, or cancellation of invitations for bids,
awards, or contracts based on such bid mistakes, shall be permitted in
accordance with rules adopted by the policy board.  After bid opening no
changes in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest
of the public or to fair competition shall be permitted.  Except as otherwise
provided by rule, all decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids,
or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes, shall be supported by a
written determination made by the chief procurement officer or head of a
purchasing agency.

     (h)  The substitution of a listed
subcontractor in furtherance of bid shopping or bid peddling before or after
the award of the prime contract shall be prohibited, and the originally listed
subcontractor may recover monetary damages from the prime contractor who
executed a contract with the public entity and the substituted subcontractor,
but not from the public entity inviting the bid.  It is the prime contractor or
substituted subcontractor's burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence
that bid shopping or bid peddling did not occur.  Substitution of a listed
subcontractor may be made by the prime contractor for the following reasons:

     (1)  Refusal
of the listed subcontractor to sign a contract with the prime contractor;

     (2)  Bankruptcy
or insolvency of the listed subcontractor;

     (3)  Inability
of the listed subcontractor to perform the requirements of the proposed
contract or the project;

     (4)  Inability
of the listed subcontractor to obtain the necessary license, bonding,
insurance, or other statutory requirements to perform the work detailed in the
contract; or

     (5)  The
listed subcontractor is barred from participating in the project as a result of
a court order or summary judgment.

     As used in this subsection:

     "Bid peddling" means attempts by a
subcontractor to undercut known bids submitted to the prime contractor to
procure a job.

     "Bid shopping" means the use of a
low bid already received by the prime contractor to pressure other
subcontractors into submitting even lower bids.

     [(h)] (i)  The contract shall be
awarded with reasonable promptness by written notice to the lowest responsible
and responsive bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth
in the invitation for bids.  In the event all bids exceed available funds as
certified by the appropriate fiscal officer, the head of the purchasing agency
responsible for the procurement in question is authorized in situations where
time or economic considerations preclude resolicitation of work of a reduced
scope to negotiate an adjustment of the bid price, including changes in the bid
requirements, with the low responsible and responsive bidder, in order to bring
the bid within the amount of available funds.

     [(i)] (j)  When it is not
practicable to initially prepare a purchase description to support an award
based on price, an invitation for bids, which requests the submission of
unpriced offers to be followed by an invitation for bids limited to those
bidders whose offers have been qualified under the criteria set forth in the
first solicitation, may be used.  If a multi-step sealed bidding process is
used, the notice and the invitation for bids shall describe each step to be
used in soliciting, evaluating, and selecting unpriced offers."

     SECTION 4.  This Act does not affect rights and duties that
matured, penalties that were incurred, and proceedings that were begun before
its effective date.

     SECTION 5.  Statutory material to be repealed
is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.

     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect upon its
approval.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


