

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the
Reinventing Education Act of 2004, Act 51, Session Laws of Hawaii 2004,
established a weighted student formula to allocate moneys to schools according
to the different costs of educating students with different needs.  Despite the
intended equitable distribution of funds, the weighted student formula has
placed small, remote schools at a disadvantage.  For example, in the case of
Hana high and elementary school, the budgetary shortfall has resulted in the
loss of several well-qualified teachers and has threatened the school's ability
to offer minimum course requirements for students to earn high school
diplomas.  As of 2005, six schools were excepted from weighted student formula
allocations.

     The legislature further finds that, despite the
current economic situation, remote schools should be funded to retain the
minimum personnel and resources necessary to graduate students.

     Accordingly, the purpose of this Act is to
improve funding equity for remote schools.

     SECTION 2.  Section 302A-1303.6, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended to read as follows:

     "ยง302A-1303.6  Weighted student formula[.];
remote schools; funding.  (a)  Based upon recommendations from
the committee on weights, the board of education may adopt a weighted student
formula for the allocation of moneys to public schools that takes into account
the educational needs of each student.  [The] Except as otherwise
provided in subsection (b), the department, upon the receipt of
appropriated moneys, shall use the weighted student formula to allocate funds
to public schools.  Principals, in consultation with teachers and school
community councils, shall expend moneys provided to the principals'
schools.  This section shall only apply to charter schools for fiscal years in
which the charter schools elect pursuant to section 302D-29 to receive
allocations according to the procedures and methodology used to calculate the
weighted student formula allocation.

     (b)  For the purposes of subsection (a), a
remote school, as defined in subsection (c), and other schools designated by
the committee on weights shall not be allocated operating funds using the
weighted student formula and shall instead be allocated operating funds by
categorical allotments that guarantee the funding of a minimum number of
instructional and support staff positions to ensure that at least minimum
course requirements are maintained; provided that:

     (1)  Instructional positions shall not be
combined with support staff positions; 

     (2)  There shall be a minimum of two
elementary school teachers per elementary grade level; and

     (3)  The categorical allotments shall remain
equal to or greater than the inflation-adjusted minimum level of funding,
except when the consumer price index for the twelve-month period ending June 30
of the preceding calendar year is less than zero.

     (c)  For the purposes of this section:

     "Consumer price index" means the
national consumer price index average over a twelve-month period that is
published monthly by the United States Department of Labor's Bureau of Labor
Statistics as the "National Consumer Price Index for All Urban
Consumers--United States City Average".

     "Inflation-adjusted minimum level of
funding" means the total amount of funding provided to the school in the
fiscal year 2016-2017; provided that this amount shall increase by three per
cent for each subsequent fiscal year.

     "Remote school" means any public
school, as defined in section 302A-101, except charter schools governed
by chapter 302D, that is a high school:

     (1)  Located at least a one-hour drive away
from the next nearest public high school; or

     (2)  Located on the island of Lanai,
Molokai, or Niihau; provided that if a high school is combined with an
elementary, middle, intermediate, or other lower level of schooling, that
entire school shall be deemed a high school for the purposes of this
subsection."

     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the
general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much
thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2017-2018 and the same sum or so
much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2018-2019 for the department
of education to provide additional per pupil funding to remote schools.

     The sums appropriated shall be expended by
the department of education for the purposes of this Act.

     SECTION 3.  Statutory material to be repealed
is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.

     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2017.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


