

     SECTION
1.  The legislature finds that the Front
street apartments on the island of Maui provide affordable housing to more than
two hundred fifty low-income residents. 
The Front street apartments were developed in 2001 as an affordable
rental housing project with one hundred forty-two units, using state financing
and state tax credits, and were expected to remain affordable to low-income
tenants for fifty years.  However, the
owners of the Front street apartments recently exercised an option to remove
the property from affordability requirements that were tied to the development
of the property, and this change will allow them to begin renting available
apartments at market rates and to raise rents for existing tenants within a few
years.

     The
legislature further finds that many tenants of the Front street apartments were
not previously aware of this threat to their housing and are worried that the
removal of affordability requirements could leave them homeless.  There is a severe shortage of affordable
housing on the island of Maui, especially in west Maui, which will be
exacerbated by the conversion of the Front street apartments to market-rate
housing.

     The
legislature also finds that the tenants, surrounding community, and the island
of Maui would benefit from the active intervention of the State in this situation
to ensure that there is no negative impact on current and future tenants of the
Front street apartments.  Act 288,
Session Laws of Hawaii 2006, regarding state intervention to preserve
affordable rents at the Kukui gardens affordable rental housing project on the
island of Oahu, provides an important precedent for this Act.

     Accordingly,
the purpose of this Act is to preserve the Front street apartments as an
affordable rental housing project.

     SECTION
2.  The legislature declares that it is
in the public interest and is required for public use to acquire the Front
street apartments as an affordable rental housing project by exercise of the
power of eminent domain if an agreement to either extend the affordable rents
or acquire the property is not reached within a reasonable time.  The legislature further declares that it is
necessary to provide for the public financing of the acquisition of the Front
street apartments by condemnation through the expenditures of general funds,
revenue bonds, rental housing revolving funds, federal and state low-income
housing tax credits, or any other public and private funds at the disposal of
the State.

     SECTION
3.  The Hawaii housing finance and
development corporation, or any appropriate entity of the State as determined
by the governor, shall immediately initiate negotiations with 3900 Corporation,
leasehold fee owners of the applicable real property, and Front Street
Affordable Housing Partners Limited Partnership, owners of the improvements
constructed upon the applicable real property, or their successors in interest
to either:

     (1)  Make available, without competitive award,
public financing resources to extend affordable rents at the Front street
apartments through at least 2027 for persons who were tenants of the Front
street apartments as of January 1, 2018; provided that the tenant's household
income does not exceed eighty per cent of the median family income for the area
as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development;
or

     (2)  Acquire the property known as the Front street
apartments, tax map key (2) 4-5-003-013, and may partner with private
for-profit or nonprofit developers for acquisition of the property and
improvements thereupon; provided that:

          (A)  Seventy rental units shall be retained at
affordable rents to households whose incomes do not exceed fifty per cent of
the median family income for the area as determined by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development; and

          (B)  Seventy-one rental units shall be retained at
affordable rents to households whose incomes do not exceed sixty per cent of
the median family income for the area as determined by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development.

     SECTION
4.  The Hawaii housing finance and
development corporation, or the appropriate entity of the State as determined
by the governor, shall submit a report to the legislature no later than twenty
days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2019 regarding its
efforts to acquire the Front street apartments and its recommendations for
financing the purchase of the property.

     SECTION
5.  If an agreement to either extend the
affordable rents to at least 2027 or acquire the property is not reached within
a reasonable time as determined by the Hawaii housing finance and development
corporation, or any other appropriate entity of the State as determined by the
governor, the appropriate state agency shall exercise its power of eminent
domain to acquire the property and improvements thereon.  For the purposes of this Act, and
notwithstanding any provision of section 201H-13, Hawaii Revised Statutes, to
the contrary, condemnation of the Front street apartments property and
improvements thereupon shall not be subject to legislative disapproval.

     SECTION 6.
 There is appropriated out of the general
revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $250,000 or so much thereof as may
be necessary for fiscal year 2018-2019 for the purposes of negotiating with the
owners of the real property and improvements thereupon known as the Front
street apartments to either extend the period of affordable rents to at least
2027, acquire the real property and improvements known as the Front street
apartments, or to commence the condemnation process; provided that no funds
authorized pursuant to this section shall be made available unless the county
of Maui appropriates $250,000 in matching county funds for the purposes of this
Act.

     The sum
appropriated shall be expended by the Hawaii housing finance and development
corporation for the purposes of this Act.

     SECTION
7.  This Act does not affect rights and
duties that matured, penalties that were incurred, and proceedings that were
begun before its effective date.

     SECTION
8.  This Act shall take effect on July 1,
2018.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


