

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that traffic
congestion is a serious problem that negatively impacts the quality of life for
residents throughout the State.  As Hawaii grows, traffic-related congestion on
the State's roadways continues to increase, forcing people to spend more time
sitting in vehicles and less time being productive at work or with families and
friends.  Recent public opinion polls have found that traffic congestion is
regularly one of the top concerns of Hawaii residents.

     One way that traffic congestion can be
addressed is through capital improvements that increase the capacity of
existing state roadways or strategically build new roadways.  These types of
projects have the potential to increase the quality of life for many future
generations of Hawaii residents.

     The legislature further finds that creating new
sources of revenue for the state highway fund will give the department of
transportation the additional flexibility to redirect other funding sources
towards important repair and maintenance projects, including much-needed repairs
for roadways in the Oahu urban core.

     The purpose of this Act is to increase revenues
into the state highway fund by:

     (1)  Increasing the rental motor vehicle customer
facility charge from $4.50 to $9.00;

     (2)  Providing a tax deduction to qualified taxpayers
to offset the financial impact of the increased charge; and

     (3)  Depositing the additional revenues obtained from
the charge increase into the state highway fund; provided that these revenues
shall be used for projects to increase the capacity of existing roadways or
create new roadways.

     SECTION 2.  Chapter 235, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to part I to be appropriately
designated and to read as follows:

     "ยง235-     Rental motor
vehicle customer facility charge; tax deduction.  (a)  Subject to
subsection (b), there shall be allowed as a deduction from gross income the
amount, not to exceed $          , for amounts paid during the taxable year by
a taxpayer for rental motor vehicle customer facility charge pursuant to section
261-7(h).

     (b)  The deduction under this section shall
not be available to the following:

     (1)  A taxpayer filing a single return or a
married person filing separately with a federal adjusted gross income of $          or
more;

     (2)  A taxpayer filing as a head of
household with a federal adjusted gross income of $          or more; or

     (3)  A taxpayer filing a joint return or as
a surviving spouse with a federal adjusted gross income of $          or
more.

     (c)  The director of taxation shall prepare
any forms necessary to claim a tax deduction under this section, may require
proof of the claim for the tax deduction, and may adopt rules pursuant to
chapter 91 to effectuate this section."

     SECTION 3.  Section 248-9, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended to read as follows:

     "ยง248-9  State highway fund.  (a) 
Moneys in the state highway fund may be expended for the following purposes:

     (1)  To pay the costs of operation, maintenance, and
repair of the state highway system, including without limitation, the cost of
equipment and general administrative overhead;

     (2)  To pay the costs of acquisition (including real
property and interests therein), planning, designing, construction, and
reconstruction of the state highway system and bikeways, including, without
limitation, the cost of equipment and general administrative overhead;

     (3)  To reimburse the general fund for interest on and
principal of general obligation bonds issued to finance highway projects where
the bonds are designated to be reimbursable out of the state highway fund; and

     (4)  To pay the costs of construction, maintenance,
and repair of county roads; provided that none of the funds expended on a
county road or program shall be federal funds when [such] the expenditure
would cause a violation of federal law or a federal grant agreement.

     (b)  At any time, the director of
transportation may transfer from the state highway fund all or any portion of
available moneys determined by the director of transportation to exceed one
hundred thirty-five per cent of the requirements for the ensuing twelve months
for the state highway fund as permitted by and in accordance with section
37-53.  For purposes of the determination, the director of transportation shall
take into consideration:

     (1)  The amount of federal funds and bond funds on
deposit in, and budgeted to be expended from, the state highway fund during the
period;

     (2)  Amounts on deposit in the state highway fund that
are encumbered or otherwise obligated;

     (3)  Budgeted amounts payable from the state highway
fund during the period;

     (4)  Revenues anticipated to be received by and
expenditures to be made from the state highway fund during the period based on
existing agreements and other information for the ensuing twelve months; and

     (5)  Any other factors as the director of
transportation shall deem appropriate.

     (c)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) and
(b), projects to be funded using state highway fund revenues generated from the
rental motor vehicle customer facility charge and deposited into the state
highway fund pursuant to section 261-7(h)(2) shall be expended for the
following projects that would increase the capacity of existing roadways or
create new roadways:

     (1)  In the county of Hawaii:

         (A)  The expansion of highway 130, from
Keaau and Pahoa;

         (B)  The Kawaihae road bypass, from
Kamuela View Estates to Mamalahoa and from Waimea to Kawaihae;

         (C)  The Daniel K. Inouye highway
extension, from Queen Kaahumanu highway to Mamalahoa highway; and

         (D)  The Keaau to Pahoa road
improvements;

     (2)  In the city and county of Honolulu:

         (A)  The widening of Kahekili highway,
from Haiku and Ahuimanu;

         (B)  The widening of the H-1
freeway, from the Waiawa interchange to the Halawa interchange; and

         (C)  The Makakilo drive extension,
from the end of the existing Makakilo drive to the Kualakai parkway
interchange; 

     (3)  In the county of Kauai:

         (A)  The Kapaa bypass road;

         (B)  The Kuhio highway short-term
improvements, from Kuamoo road to the temporary bypass road;

         (C)  The Kuhio highway improvements,
from Hanamaulu and Kapaa and from the vicinity of Kapule highway to the Kapaa
stream bridge; and

         (D)  The northerly leg of the west
bypass, from Maluhia road to Koloa road;

     (4)  In the county of Maui:

         (A)  The Paia relief route, from
Spreckelsville to Baldwin and from Baldwin to Hookipa park;

         (B)  The Lahaina bypass, from the
Lahaina bypass to the Kaanapali connector;

         (C)  The Lahaina bypass, Honoapiilani
highway realignment, from Hokiokio place to the relocated southern terminus and
from the Keawe street extension to the future Kaanapali connector;

         (D)  The Kihei to Upcountry highway
project, from Haliimaile road and Haleakala highway to Kaonoulu street and
Piilani highway;

         (E)  The Honoapiilani highway
realignment and widening, from Launiupoko to Maalaea and from the Kaanapali
connector to the vicinity of Honokowai; and

         (F)  The Kaahumanu avenue widening,
from Waiale road to Hana highway; and

     (5)  Any other project that would increase
the capacity of existing roadways or create new roadways; 

provided that upon completion of these projects,
the revenues from the rental motor vehicle customer facility charge may be used
for any other purpose authorized pursuant to this section."

     SECTION 4.  Section 261-5.6, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:

     "(a)  There is established in the state
treasury the rental motor vehicle customer facility charge special fund to be
administered by the director, into which shall be deposited [all proceeds
from the rental motor vehicle customer facility charge.] one-half of the
proceeds from the rental motor vehicle customer facility charge, as provided in
section 261-7(h)(1)."

     SECTION 5.  Section 261-7, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (h) to read as follows:

     "(h)  Notwithstanding any laws to the
contrary, the department may establish, levy, assess, and collect rental motor
vehicle customer facility charges without regard to chapter 91, which shall be
paid to the department periodically as determined by the department [and
shall be used to pay for, or finance on a long-term basis or other-term basis
where appropriate, the design, planning, construction, and other uses of the
rental motor vehicle customer facility charges as set forth by the rental motor
vehicle customer facility charge special fund in section 261-5.6].

     The rental motor vehicle customer facility
charges shall be levied, assessed, and collected from all rental motor vehicle
customers who benefit from the use of any type of rental motor vehicle facility
or service provided by the department at a state airport.

     Beginning [September 1, 2010,] September
1, 2017, the department shall levy, assess, and collect a rental motor
vehicle customer facility charge of [$4.50] $9.00 per day, or any
portion of a day that a rental motor vehicle is rented or leased, by a rental
motor vehicle concession where customers pick up and return rental vehicles to
a facility at a state airport as determined by the director.

     All rental motor vehicle customer facility
charges shall be collected by lessors as defined in section 437D-3 and who
operate a rental motor vehicle concession awarded by the department at a state
airport; provided that customers of lessors, as defined in section 437D-3, who
do not operate a rental motor vehicle concession at a state airport but whose
customers benefit from the use of a rental motor vehicle facility or service at
a state airport paid for by rental motor vehicle customer facility charges,
shall collect from rental motor vehicle customers, rental motor vehicle
customer facility charges in an amount determined by the department in its sole
discretion that represents a fair share of the cost and ongoing expenses
relating to customer use of the facility or service notwithstanding any law to
the contrary and without regard to the requirements of chapter 91.  All rental
motor vehicle customer facility charges collected by the lessor shall be paid
to the department[.]; provided that of the revenues collected
pursuant to this subsection:

     (1)  One-half shall be deposited into the
rental motor vehicle customer facility charge special fund established by
section 261-5.6; and

     (2)  One-half shall be deposited into the
state highway fund established under section 248-8 for expenditure in
accordance with the purposes described in section 248-9(c).

     Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the
department may negotiate and contract the management, maintenance, and
operations of the facility and related services with one or more airport
concessions or their designee that share in the use of a rental motor vehicle
customer facility at a state airport."

     SECTION 6.  Statutory material to be repealed
is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.

     SECTION 7.  This Act
shall take effect on July 1, 2017.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


