

     SECTION 1.  In an attempt to
strengthen minimum standards of child care to improve health and safety of
children, the legislature enacted Act 161, Session Laws of Hawaii 2017,
requiring child care providers to obtain and maintain liability insurance
coverage.  Act 161 amended section
346-157, Hawaii Revised Statutes, directing the department of human services to
require all child care providers to obtain and maintain liability insurance as
a condition of operating a child care facility.

     The legislature finds that while insurance
coverage for providers of child care services is available, there are a variety
of policy limits, premium amounts, coverages, and exclusions from coverage that
may be applicable to an individual child care provider, as determined by the
market.  The legislature is concerned
that unavailability of specified coverage and cost of obtaining and maintaining
insurance coverage may result in a decrease in the number of regulated
home-based family child care and group child care providers across the State.  Currently, there are approximately four
hundred independent regulated home-based family child care and group child care
providers statewide.  A reduction in
available regulated home-based family child care and group child care providers
may further result in an increase in child care costs at remaining providers.  This may cause families to forego employment
to provide their own child care or to choose unregulated child care.  Foregoing employment will reduce a family's
income and resources and choosing unregulated child care means the family will
not have the benefit of the health and safety measures provided through
regulated child care.

     Further, the legislature finds that survey
responses from home-based child care providers indicate that insurance
providers have informed child care providers that current homeowners' policies
may not be renewed if they are conducting a child care business on the insured
property.  The legislature finds that the
inability of homeowners to obtain homeowners' insurance due to providing child
care services is clearly an unintended consequence of Act 161.

     The purpose of this Act is to amend
liability insurance requirements for child care providers by:

     (1)  Deleting the Department's obligation to
specify the required coverage amount; and

     (2)  Delay the implementation and enforcement of
Act 161 to provide the legislature additional time to study the issue and balance access to affordable, regulated child care and
affordable insurance coverage and to give the department additional time to
develop and implement a compliance process to verify that a regulated child
care provider maintains liability insurance.

     SECTION 2.  Section
346-157, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsections (b) and
(c) to read as follows:

     "(b)  The department shall require all providers to
obtain and maintain liability insurance coverage [in an amount determined by
the department] as a condition of licensure, temporary permission, or
registration to operate a child care facility.

     (c) 
The department, as a condition of continued licensure, temporary
permission, or registration, shall require all providers to disclose in writing
to each parent or guardian:

     (1)  Applying to have a
child cared for at the provider's facility, summary information including the
insurer's name and contact information, coverage amounts, and effective dates
for the provider's liability insurance coverage at the time of application; [or]
and

     (2)  Within seven
working days of any change, cancellation, or termination of liability insurance
coverage, that the coverage has been changed, canceled, or terminated while the
parent's or guardian's child is cared for at the provider's facility."

     SECTION 3.  Act 161, Session Laws of Hawaii 2017, is
amended by amending section 3 to read as follows:

     "SECTION 3.  The department of human services shall submit
a report to the legislature, no later than twenty days prior to the convening
of the regular session of [2018,] 2019, on the following issues
related to the liability insurance requirements established by section 2 of
this Act:

     [(1) The amount of liability insurance coverage
required to be obtained by child care providers;

     (2)] (1)  The
costs incurred by child care providers to obtain liability insurance and the
projected impact these costs may have on the rates charged to consumers; and

     [(3)] (2) Outreach
efforts conducted by the department, to ensure compliance with the requirements
of this Act."

     SECTION 4.  Act 161, Session Laws of Hawaii 2017, is
amended by amending section 5 to read as follows: 

     "SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2017;
provided that implementation and enforcement of the liability insurance
requirements under section 2 of this Act shall take effect on [January 1,
2019.] July 1, 2019."

     SECTION 5.  Statutory material to be repealed is
bracketed and stricken.  New statutory
material is underscored.

     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 3000.

