

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that approximately ten
per cent of the State's teachers switch schools, relocate, or leave the
profession each year.  Only fifty to
sixty per cent of current teachers have been at their school for five years or
more.  Chronic teacher turnover forces
the department of education to rely on emergency hires and substitute teachers
to fill vacancies.

     The
legislature further finds that teacher recruitment and retention is especially
difficult for poor and hard-to-staff communities.  Equitable
Access to Excellent Educators, a report published by the United States Department
of Education in 2015, found that an average of 14.48 per cent of teachers in
low-poverty schools are inexperienced, unqualified, or teaching outside of
their field of expertise.  In
high-poverty schools, however, an average of 21.48 per cent of teachers are
inexperienced, unqualified, or out-of-field.

     The
legislature additionally finds that Hawaii's high cost of living is a
significant contributing factor in the department of education's teacher
recruitment and retention efforts.  According
to a WalletHub study, the State ranked fifty-first out of fifty states and the
District of Columbia for starting teacher salary and median teacher salary
adjusted for cost of living.

     The
purpose of this Act is to improve teacher recruitment and retention by
establishing a teacher home assistance program to provide housing vouchers to
full-time teachers employed by the department of education, including teachers
at public charter schools, who teach in a hard-to-fill school, as determined by
the department of education, and whose household income does not exceed eighty
per cent of the area median income.

     SECTION 2.  Chapter 201H, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is
amended by adding a new section to part II to be appropriately designated and
to read as follows:

     "ยง201H-  
 Teacher home assistance program.  (a) 
There is established a teacher home assistance program to be
administered by the corporation.

     (b)  The corporation shall provide housing
vouchers to full-time teachers employed by the department of education,
including teachers at public charter schools, who teach in a hard-to-fill
school, as determined by the department of education, and whose household
income does not exceed eighty per cent of the area median income.

     (c)  Housing vouchers shall be provided on a
first-come, first-served basis.  Each
housing voucher shall not exceed $500 per month for as long as the qualified
teacher is employed by the department of education, teaches in a hard-to-fill
school as determined by the department of education, and resides in this State.

     (d)  A housing voucher provided under the teacher
home assistance program may be used for:

     (1)  Rent;

     (2)  Mortgage
payments for the teacher's primary residence; or

     (3)  Down payment on
residential real property; provided that the residence shall be the teacher's
primary residence; provided further that the teacher shall not own, operate, or
control any other residential real property.

     (e)  Upon the establishment of the teacher home
assistance program, the corporation shall develop an application procedure, as
well as processes, procedures, and forms necessary to implement and maintain
the program.  The corporation shall also
work with the department of education and state public charter school commission
to develop a process to verify an applicant's status as a full-time teacher
employed at a hard-to-fill school as determined by the department of education.

     (f)  Any housing voucher granted pursuant to this
section shall be renewable for one additional year without further application
or verification.

     (g)  The corporation may adopt rules pursuant to
chapter 91 to effectuate the purpose of this section."

     SECTION
3.  There is appropriated out of the
general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $          
or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2018-2019 to provide
housing vouchers through the teacher home assistance program established by
this Act.

     The sum
appropriated shall be expended by the Hawaii housing finance and development corporation
for the purposes of this Act.

     SECTION
4.  New statutory material is
underscored.

     SECTION
5.  This Act shall take effect upon its
approval.

