

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 321, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended by adding a new part to be appropriately designated and to
read as follows:

"PART
   .  PESTICIDE BUFFER ZONES AROUND SCHOOLS

     §321-A 
Definitions.  As used in this part, unless the context clearly
requires otherwise:

     "Certified
pesticide applicator" has the same meaning as defined in section
149A-2.

     "Commercial pesticide applicator" has
the same meaning as defined in section 149A-2.

     "Department"
means the department of health.

     "Experimental
use pesticide" means a pesticide whose use is authorized by an
experimental use permit by either the Environmental Protection Agency or the
department.

     "General
use pesticide" has the same meaning as defined in section 149A-2.

     "Health"
means physical and mental health.

     "Outdoor application" means an
application of a pesticide made outside of a building or enclosed structure. 
The term excludes indoor applications of pesticides and structural or termite
application of pesticides, regardless of whether such applications are applied
inside or outside of a building or enclosed structure.

     "Pest control operator" has the same
meaning as defined in section 149A-2.

     "Pesticide" has the same meaning as
defined in section 149A-2.

     "Restricted use pesticide" has the
same meaning as defined in section 149A-2.

     §321-b 
Pesticide buffer zones for schools.  (a)  Beginning on July 1, 2018, any entity or person
that uses or purchases in excess of       pounds or
      gallons of restricted use pesticides annually
shall restrict the outdoor application of all pesticides, including restricted
use, general use, or experimental use pesticides, to no closer than    feet
from the property line of any school.

     (b)  If a more
restrictive standard is set forth in the information contained on the label of
the pesticide, or by other regulations, including county ordinances or rules,
the more restrictive standard shall apply.

     (c)  Any entity
or person subject to this section shall ensure that prior to any outdoor
application of pesticides pursuant to subsection (a), the application site is
positively identified using a unique and verifiable method, including:

     (1)  An onboard, geo-referenced electronic mapping and
navigation system, such as the Global Positioning System;

     (2)  Effective site markings visible to the pesticide
applicator; or

     (3)  Other methods approved by the department.

     (d)  Any entity or person that is subject to
this section, prior to any application of pesticides, shall provide the
certified pesticide applicator, commercial pesticide applicator, or pest
control operator with a site plan that includes a site map that:

     (1)  Delineates the boundaries of the application area
and the property lines;

     (2)  Depicts the location of schools within
      feet of the application areas; and

     (3)  Depicts the pesticide buffer zones for schools
where no pesticide application is allowed, as provided in subsection (a).

     §321-C  Exemptions. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this part, any entity or person subject to
section 321-B may obtain from the department a single-use exemption from the
prohibition on outdoor applications of pesticides in pesticide buffer zones for
schools, as provided in subsection (a).  The department shall issue a single-use
exemption if it determines that:

     (1)  The pest situation poses an immediate
threat to human health and the environment; and

     (2)  There is no viable alternative to the use of the
proposed pesticide.

     §321-D  Rules.  The department of
health shall adopt rules pursuant to chapter 91 necessary to effectuate this part.

     §321-E  County authority. 
Nothing in this part shall be construed to prohibit or preempt the authority of
a unit of local government in the State of Hawaii, including counties and any
other political subdivisions created under article VIII, section 1, of the
Hawaii State Constitution, to regulate pesticide disclosure, notification, and
use in a manner that is equivalent to or more restrictive than the provisions
contained in this part."

     SECTION 2.  If any provision of this Act, or the application
thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the invalidity does not
affect other provisions or applications of the Act that can be given effect
without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of
this Act are severable.

     SECTION 3.  In codifying the new sections added
by section 1 of this Act, the revisor of statutes shall substitute appropriate
section numbers for the letters used in designating the new sections in this
Act.

     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its
approval.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


