

     SECTION
1.  The legislature
finds that opioids are a class of drugs that includes the illegal drug heroin,
synthetic opioids such as fentanyl, and prescription pain relievers, such as oxycodone,
hydrocodone, codeine, and morphine. 
These drugs are chemically related and interact with opioid receptors on
nerve cells in the body and brain.  The
legislature further finds that opioid pain relievers are generally safe when
taken for a short time as prescribed by a physician.  However, regular use of opioid pain
relievers, even as prescribed by a physician, can lead to dependence.  Moreover, because opioid pain relievers
produce euphoria in addition to pain relief, they are very prone to
misuse.  The misuse of opioid pain
relievers can easily lead to overdose incidents and deaths.

     The
legislature further finds that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
formally declared an opioid epidemic in 2011. 
According to the American Society of Addiction Medicine, more than
2,500,000 Americans have an opioid-use disorder.  The opioid epidemic is the deadliest drug
crisis in United States history, with drug overdoses claiming more lives in
2016 than motor vehicle accidents or gun violence.  Stated otherwise, the opioid epidemic is
tantamount to a new 9/11 attack every three weeks.

     At the
heart of the opioid epidemic is OxyContin, which is a brand name available for
the prescription pain killer, oxycodone. 
OxyContin is a dangerous and deadly opioid that was developed in the
1990's by Purdue Pharma, which is based in Stamford, Connecticut and is owned
and operated by the Sackler family.  The
Sacklers are best known as philanthropists whose family name is prominently
featured in exhibits at a number of prominent American institutions, including
the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Harvard University, and the Louvre.  Because the Sacklers have managed to write
their family name out of the history of the family business, most visitors to
these establishments are unaware that the family made their fortune by being
one of the prime beneficiaries of the current epidemic of opioid use.

     As detailed
in an article published in The New Yorker
on October 30, 2017, the Sacklers' great wealth was earned at the expense of
the millions of people who have fallen prey to drug addiction due to
OxyContin's intrinsic addictive properties, of which the Sacklers were well
aware, but denied any knowledge.  As
noted, the Sacklers launched OxyContin with a multi-faceted marketing campaign
that misinformed doctors about the risks of opioids, which included addiction
and death.  In September 2017, the
attorneys general of forty-one U.S. states banded together to investigate the
role these deceptive marketing campaigns on the part of opioid manufacturers
and distributors, including Purdue Pharma, had in the current crisis of opiate
addictions and overdose deaths.

     Meanwhile,
in April 2016, Congress, yielding to pressure from the drug industry, passed a
law that effectively stripped the federal Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)
of its most potent weapon against large drug companies suspected of spilling
prescription narcotics onto the nation's streets.  By that time, the opioid crisis had surged
into the deadliest drug epidemic in United States history, having claimed
200,000 lives, more than three times the number of United States military
deaths in the Vietnam War.

     Prior to the
passage of The Ensuring Patient Access and Effective Drug Enforcement Act of
2016, the DEA had broad authority to freeze suspicious narcotic shipments from
drug distribution companies, as long as the shipment posed an "imminent
danger" to the community.  The DEA
used this authority to immediately prevent drugs from reaching the
streets.  The new law requires the DEA to
demonstrate that a company's action represents "a substantial likelihood
of an immediate threat," which is a much higher bar.  As a result, it is now virtually impossible
for the DEA to freeze suspicious opioid shipments.  The higher standard has severely undermined
the DEA's previously aggressive enforcement efforts.

     Accordingly,
in this regulatory vacuum of effective federal law enforcement efforts against
the drug epidemic, the several states have no choice but to step up their own
efforts to combat the epidemic through multi-faceted attacks, such as
requiring:

     (1)  Warnings to accompany opioid prescriptions;

     (2)  More comprehensive health insurance coverage
for the treatment of opioid dependence;

     (3)  Data collection on opioid overdoses and
deaths; and

     (4)  Lowest possible dosage levels for
prescriptions.

     The
purpose of this Act is to permit warning labels for the sale of opioids.

     SECTION
2.  Chapter 329E, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and
to read as follows:

     "ยง329E-    Warning label.  In addition to any requirements for
labeling of drugs under part I of chapter 328, part III of chapter 329, and any
other requirement for labeling of prescription drugs pursuant to state or
federal law, a health care professional or pharmacist who dispenses any opioid
drug may include on the drug's package a warning label that contains wording
substantially similar to the following in all capital letters:

"Warning: 
this drug is an OPIOID.  the Use
of an OPIOID may result in an addiction to OPIOIDS and death.""

     SECTION
3.  New statutory material is
underscored.

     SECTION
4.  This Act does not affect rights and
duties that matured, penalties that were incurred, and proceedings that were
begun before its effective date.

     SECTION
5.  This Act shall take effect on July 1,
2050; provided that the warning label authorization established by this Act
shall be implemented commencing August 1, 2018.

