

     SECTION
1.  The purpose of this Act is to
transfer title, custody, control, and management authority of the land under
the Manoa innovation center, located at 2800 Woodlawn Drive, Honolulu, Hawaii
96822, and identified as Tax Map Key 2-9-26:  Por. 3, 37, and 38, containing an area of
109,507 square feet, including any buildings, structures, and appurtenances
situated on the land, to the Hawaii technology development corporation.

     SECTION
2.  The University of Hawaii shall
transfer title, control, custody, and management authority of the parcel of
land identified as Tax Map Key 2-9-26:  Por. 3, 37, and 38, including any buildings,
structures, and appurtenances situated on the land, to the Hawaii technology
development corporation; provided that the Hawaii technology development
corporation shall return title, control, custody, and management authority of
the land, including any buildings, structures, and appurtenances situated on
the land, to the University of Hawaii on June 30, 2029.

     SECTION
3.  All deeds, leases, contracts, loans,
agreements, permits, or other documents executed or entered into by or on
behalf of the University of Hawaii pursuant to the provisions of the Hawaii
Revised Statutes applicable to the land that is being
transferred pursuant to this Act shall remain in full force and effect,
unless affirmatively amended by the appropriate agency, under due process.  Upon the effective date of this Act, every
reference to the University of Hawaii applicable to the land that is
being transferred pursuant to this Act shall be construed as a reference
to the Hawaii technology development corporation.

     SECTION
4.  All rights, powers,
functions, and duties of the University of Hawaii relating to the land that is
being transferred pursuant to this Act are transferred to the Hawaii technology
development corporation.

     SECTION
5.  During the time between the enactment
of this Act and conveyance of the lands subject to this Act, the University of
Hawaii shall make no decisions on deeds, leases, contracts, loans, agreements,
permits, or other documents relating to the land that is being
transferred pursuant to this Act unless the Hawaii technology development
corporation concurs in writing.

     SECTION
6.  If any part of this Act is
found to be in conflict with federal requirements that are a prescribed
condition for the allocation of federal funds to the State, the conflicting
part of this Act is inoperative solely to the extent of the conflict and with
respect to the agencies directly affected, and this finding does not affect the
operation of the remainder of this Act in its application to the agencies
concerned.  The rules in effect as a
result of this Act shall meet federal requirements that are a necessary
condition to the receipt of federal funds by the State or the city and county
of Honolulu.

     SECTION
7.  This Act shall take effect on January
1, 2050; provided that the conveyance of the lands subject to this Act
shall not be finally executed until July 1, 2019, to allow for budgetary
adjustments, rule changes, and other necessary transition actions; provided
further that this Act shall be repealed on July 1, 2029.

 

