

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the Wasmannia
auropunctata, known as the little fire ant, threatens native biodiversity,
alters tropical ecosystems, impairs human health, impedes tourism, diminishes
agricultural productivity, mars horticulture sales, and accordingly ranks among
the world's worst invasive species.  Human behaviors and habitats allow the
little fire ant to move quickly, disperse widely, grow to high densities, and
inhabit locations not otherwise possible.

     Hawaii's tropical climate is ideally suited for
little fire ant establishment and growth.  The little fire ant, by far one of
Hawaii's worst invasive pests, is not only bothersome to residents, visitors,
and farmers because of its nasty sting, it also harms agriculture and natural
areas by nurturing other invasive pests such as aphids, mealybugs, soft scale
insects, and whiteflies.

     The legislature further finds that when
compared to the other counties, the county of Hawaii has been affected the most
by the little fire ant.  The University of Hawaii, the county of Hawaii, and
the department of agriculture must collaborate to develop and implement
effective measures to address the impacts of the little fire ant in the county
of Hawaii.

     The department of agriculture's little fire ant
program was created to survey, detect, and develop the most efficient little
fire ant management strategy with minimal impact to the State's tropical
ecosystem and non-target organisms, while serving as the role model to
eradicate the little fire ant in all communities.  The legislature finds that
the department of agriculture needs to be more proactive and aggressive in
implementing its current fire ant program.

     The purpose of this Act is to establish a pilot
pesticide treatment coupon project within the department of agriculture's
existing little fire ant program, create a little fire ant site map, and
appropriate funds for these purposes.

     SECTION 2.  The department of agriculture shall
establish and implement a pilot pesticide treatment coupon project within its
current little fire ant program.  The pilot project shall distribute coupons
redeemable for appropriate pesticides at suppliers or vendors within the county
of Hawaii at no cost to individuals who have reported and verified to the
department the presence of little fire ants on their property within the county
of Hawaii.  Each coupon shall be valid for a one-year supply of the
department's recommended treatment plan, including supplies and equipment
purchased from private companies; provided that the value of the coupon shall
not exceed the cost of a one-year supply of the department's recommended
treatment plan.  The department shall provide each individual with information
on the proper usage and health and safety precautions regarding the
department's recommended treatment plan.

     SECTION 3.  The department of agriculture shall
create a map that indicates all little fire ant sites in the county of Hawaii
by using all its available data, including verified reports of little fire ant
sites.  The map shall be updated monthly and made available on the department's
website.

     SECTION 4.  The department of agriculture shall
submit a report on its progress in implementing the mandates of this Act to the
legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular
session of 2018.  The report shall include findings and recommendations,
including findings and recommendations on whether the pilot project and little
fire ant site map should be continued, terminated, or modified.  The report
shall also include any necessary proposed legislation.

     SECTION 5.  There is appropriated out of the
general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $300,000 or so much thereof
as may be necessary for fiscal year 2017-2018 and the same sum or so much
thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2018-2019 for the little fire ant
pilot pesticide treatment coupon project established pursuant to section 2 and
the little fire ant site map established pursuant to section 3 of this Act.

     The sums appropriated shall be expended by
the department of agriculture for the purposes of this Act.

     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2017.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


