

PART I

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that chronic,
unsheltered, nomadic homelessness is a humanitarian disaster that endangers
public health and safety.  The
legislature recognizes that multiple national studies show that Housing First
programs are enormously effective, mostly because the stability of a permanent
home, combined with supportive services and treatment, fosters recovery from
addiction, mental illness, and other afflictions.

     The legislature also finds that for
many years, the State used homeless shelters and transitional group homes as an
interim measure, while attempting to place as many homeless persons as possible
into subsidized rentals and traditionally constructed apartments under a
Housing First paradigm.  Unfortunately,
economic constraints, construction delays, and landlords' resistance to
homeless tenants have made the supply of subsidized rentals and traditionally constructed
housing inadequate.  Moreover, many
persons who are mentally ill or who struggle with substance abuse cannot live
in close quarters with others in a shelter or group home, and thus continue to
live unsheltered.

     The legislature notes that technical
innovations now make it possible to build alternative dwellings that can serve
as permanent housing, as well as emergency shelters, for a greater number of
homeless families and individuals in a shorter period of time than conventional
housing.  The legislature believes that
the best way to achieve this on a scale large enough to end homelessness is to
incorporate alternatively constructed homes into villages using Housing First
practices.  The legislature further finds
that in August 2017, the county of Hawaii began, on a pilot basis, sponsoring a
safe zone known as Camp Kikaha.  The
legislature intends that this Act will fund additional and larger safe zone
sites in East and West Hawaii.  In the
meantime, suitable sites in East Hawaii have yet to be located, and selected
sites in West Hawaii are undergoing the planning and environmental assessment
process.

     Accordingly, the purpose of this
Act, which shall be known as the "Hawaii County Homeless Villages Act",
is to secure necessary funding to establish two pilot homeless villages under a
Housing First paradigm with an aggregate total of fifty units, of which twenty-five
units each shall be located at a Kona homeless village site and a Hilo homeless
village site.

     SECTION 2.  (a) 
There is established within the department of human services a Hawaii
county homeless villages program that provides housing and supportive services
to homeless persons under a Housing First paradigm.  The program shall be operated in a manner that
is reasonably consistent with the following requirements:

     (1)  The department
shall construct no less than fifty homes, which shall be completed no later
than two years after the effective date of this Act; provided that twenty-five
homes shall be constructed on a homeless village site in Kona and twenty-five
homes shall be constructed on a homeless village site in Hilo;

     (2)  The cost to the
department to construct each home shall not exceed $15,000 per home; provided
that this figure shall not include the costs of infrastructure installation;

     (3)  Each home shall
contain at least three hundred square feet of living space, have electricity
with lighting, and have no less than eight standard electrical outlets;

     (4)  Homes shall be
private dwellings for homeless individuals and families; provided that homeless
persons who are not related shall not be required to share a home;

     (5)  The cost of rent,
utilities, and supportive services shall:

          (A)  Be provided free
of charge for homeless individuals or families with no income;

          (B)  Not exceed twenty
per cent of the individual's gross income for a homeless individual with
income; and

          (C)  Not exceed twenty
per cent of the family's combined gross income for homeless families with
income, less $100 per month for each dependent family member that resides in
the home;

          provided that the department
may adjust these amounts for inflation;

     (6)  Each homeless village
shall have a community center for residents, which shall include:

          (A)  A reasonable
number of communal showers;

          (B)  Bathrooms;

          (C)  A kitchen;

          (D)  Lockers for
residents' valuables;

          (E)  Mailboxes for
incoming mail; and

          (F)  A multipurpose
room for residential meetings and supportive services;

          provided
that a home may be constructed with a built-in bathroom, shower, or kitchen, if
necessary to qualify the home for use of a housing voucher;

     (7)  The department
shall make reasonable efforts to complete each community center at a cost of
$100,000 or less per village; and

     (8)  Each village shall
have systems to dispose of trash and other waste.    

     (b) 
The department may experiment with different types of housing, including
but not limited to high grade fire resistant tents, tiny houses, domes, huts,
or other innovative types of housing that are within budgetary constraints.

     (c) 
The department shall establish rules for residents of the villages that
are reasonably consistent with what are commonly known as Housing First
practices.  To the extent practicable,
the rules shall allow residents to participate in self-government.

     (d) 
The department shall adopt rules pursuant to chapter 91, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, as well as policies and procedures, for the purpose of qualifying
applicants for residency under the Hawaii county homeless villages
program.  Qualification rules, policies,
and procedures shall be consistent with the rules, policies, and procedures of
the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development's Coordinated Entry
System.  To the extent practicable, the
department shall ensure that qualification procedures for residency under the
program provide for rapid admission and use the least restrictive standards
practicable.

     (e) 
The department shall collaborate with appropriate departmental personnel
and state and county law enforcement agencies to provide security for the Hawaii
county homeless villages program.

     (f) 
The department shall work with appropriate agencies to ensure that
residents have reasonable access to public transportation.

     SECTION 3.  Notwithstanding any other law to the
contrary, all state and county permitting and construction fees shall be waived
with respect to the construction and maintenance of dwellings contemplated or
constructed under section 2 of this Act.

     SECTION 4.  The department of human services shall
establish two homeless assessment centers in Hawaii county that shall be
modeled after the Kakaako family assessment center on the island of Oahu;
provided that a homeless assessment center shall be established within
reasonable proximity of each of the Kona and Hilo homeless village sites.

     SECTION 5. 
There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii
the sum of $1,187,500 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year
2018-2019 to establish the Hawaii county homeless villages program and to construct
fifty homes and physical infrastructure as required by section 2 of this Act.

     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the
department of human services for the purposes of this Act.

     SECTION 6. 
There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii
the sum of $1,360,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year
2018-2019; provided that of this amount,
$         shall be for the management,
maintenance, and day-to-day operations of the Hawaii county homeless villages
established under section 2 of this Act, and 
$         shall be for the
management, maintenance, and day-to-day operations of the homeless assessment
centers established under section 4 of this Act.

     The sum appropriated shall be expended by
the department of human services for the purposes of this Act.

PART II

     SECTION 7. 
Chapter 662, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section
to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:

     "ยง662-     Immunity from liability for provision of
housing or services to homeless persons.  An employee of the State who provides
housing or services to a homeless person shall be immune from civil liability
in any action based upon the acts or omissions of the employee; provided that
the employee was acting in good faith and within the scope of the employee's
functions and duties as an employee of the State."

     SECTION 8.  Chapter 662D, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is
amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as
follows:

     "ยง662D-     Immunity from liability for provision of
housing or services to homeless persons.  A volunteer who provides housing or
services to a homeless person on behalf of the State shall be immune from civil
liability in any action based upon the acts or omissions of the volunteer;
provided that the volunteer was acting in good faith and within the scope of
the volunteer's official functions and duties with the State."

     SECTION 9.  Section 662-15, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is
amended to read as follows:

     "ยง662-15  Exceptions.  This chapter shall not apply to:

     (1)  Any claim based
upon an act or omission of an employee of the State, exercising due care, in
the execution of a statute or regulation, whether or not [such] the
statute or regulation is valid, or based upon the exercise or performance or
the failure to exercise or perform a discretionary function or duty on the part
of a state officer or employee, whether or not the discretion involved has been
abused;

     (2)  Any claim arising
in respect of the assessment or collection of any tax[,] or the
detention of any goods or merchandise by law enforcement officers;

     (3)  Any claim for
which a remedy is provided elsewhere in the laws of the State;

     (4)  Any claim arising
out of assault, battery, false imprisonment, false arrest, malicious
prosecution, abuse of process, libel, slander, misrepresentation, deceit, or
interference with contract rights;

     (5)  Any claim arising
out of the combatant activities of the Hawaii National Guard and Hawaii state
defense force during time of war, or during the times the Hawaii National Guard
is engaged in federal service pursuant to section 316, 502, 503, 504, 505, or
709 of title 32 of the United States Code;

     (6)  Any claim arising
in a foreign country; [or]

     (7)  Any claim arising
out of the acts or omissions of any boating enforcement officer[.];
or

     (8)  Any claim
arising out of the acts or omissions of:

          (A)  A
volunteer acting on behalf of the State; or

          (B)  An
employee of the State acting within the scope of the employee's employment,

          who provides housing or
services to a homeless person, or based upon the exercise or performance or the
failure to exercise or perform a discretionary function or duty, whether or not
the discretion involved has been abused."

PART III

     SECTION 10.  Statutory material to be repealed is
bracketed and stricken.  New statutory
material is underscored.

     SECTION 11.  This Act shall
take effect on July 1, 2018.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


