

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the
abuse of illicit drugs in the State is an epidemic that has no place in
Hawaii's families, communities, or schools.  According to the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, drug overdose deaths in Hawaii increased by eighty-three
per cent between 2006 and 2014, a growth rate more than double the national
average of thirty-seven per cent.

     The alcohol and drug abuse division of the
department of health provided startling data in its December 2015 legislative
report.  According to the report, accidental drug overdose is a serious public
health problem in Hawaii, with an almost two-fold increase in deaths from drug
poisonings between 1999 and 2013.  The report also determined that eighty-eight
per cent of the fatal poisonings between 2009 and 2013 were drug-related, with
prescription drugs being implicated in nearly half of the unintentional
poisonings and thirty-six per cent of deaths involving opioid pain relievers.  Death
certificate information further indicates that fifty-two per cent of these
deaths involved illicit substances, most commonly methamphetamine and cocaine.

     The legislature further finds that there are
other innovative options available that would efficiently and effectively aid
in the abatement of this public crisis.  At present, the department of public safety
deploys the services of the special operations K9 unit to detect bombs,
narcotics, and currency.  This unit is currently based in Honolulu and is composed
of five canine handlers and five deputy canines, with two specializing in bomb
detection, two specializing in narcotics detection, and one specializing in
currency detection.  The successful use of detection canines at airports,
harbors, and borders is commonplace across the nation and world.

     The legislature finds that substantially increasing
financial support to the special operations K9 unit will have a great impact on
Hawaii's drug epidemic.  Accordingly, the purpose of this Act is to establish a
special fund and make an appropriation to increase sheriff canine handlers and deputy
canine resources to assist with the detection of explosives and the fight
against narcotics and narcotics trafficking.

     SECTION 2.  Chapter 329, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to part V to be appropriately
designated and to read as follows:

     "ยง329-    Special
operations K9 unit special fund.  (a)  There is established
in the state treasury the special operations K9 unit special fund, into which
shall be deposited:

     (1)  Moneys appropriated to the fund by the
legislature; and

     (2)  Moneys directed, allocated, or
disbursed to the K9 unit from government agencies or private individuals or
organizations, including grants, gifts, awards, donations, and assessments of
landowners for costs to administer and operate the K9 unit.

     (b)  Moneys in the fund shall be expended by
the department for federal, state, and county law enforcements efforts,
including the hiring of personnel, to:

     (1)  Prevent narcotic use and trafficking;

     (2)  Detect explosives; and

     (3)  Detect currency.

     (c)  The auditor shall conduct an annual
audit of the uses of the fund and submit a report detailing the findings of the
audit to the legislature annually."

     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the
general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $7,000,000 or so much thereof
as may be necessary for fiscal year 2017-2018 and the same sum or so much
thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2018-2019 to be deposited into the
special operations K9 unit special fund.

     SECTION 4.  There is appropriated out of the
special operations K9 unit special fund the sum of $7,000,000 or so much
thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2017-2018 and the same sum or so
much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2018-2019 to support
explosive, narcotics, and currency detection efforts by federal, state, and
county law enforcement by funding:

     (1)  Thirty full-time equivalent (30.0 FTE) permanent
canine handler positions and thirty deputy canines within the department of
public safety on Oahu;

     (2)  Ten full-time equivalent (10.0 FTE) permanent
canine handler positions and ten deputy canines within the department of public
safety on Hawaii island;

     (3)  Six full-time equivalent (6.0 FTE) permanent
canine handler positions and six deputy canines within the department of public
safety on Maui; and

     (4)  Four full-time equivalent (4.0 FTE) permanent
canine handler positions and four deputy canines within the department of
public safety on Kauai;

provided that the appropriated funds shall be
expended at a rate of one-third of the total amount appropriated over the
course of three years; provided further that canine handler positions and
deputy canines be acquired for the island of Oahu before funds are expended on
the islands of Hawaii, Maui, and Kauai.

     The sums appropriated shall be expended
by the department of public safety for the purposes of this Act.

     SECTION 5.  New statutory material is
underscored.

     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect on July
1, 2017.

 

