

     SECTION
1.  The legislature finds that victims of
crime should be treated with dignity, respect, and courtesy and their rights
should be protected throughout the criminal justice process.  The legislature further finds that while
those accused of crimes have various rights specified in article I, section 14
of the Constitution of the State of Hawaii, victims of crime have no express
constitutional protections.

     The
purpose of this Act is to propose an amendment to article I of the Constitution
of the State of Hawaii to provide recognized and protected constitutional
rights for victims of crime from the time of their victimization and continuing
throughout the criminal justice process, to be known as "Marsy’s
Law".

     SECTION 2.  Article I of the Constitution of the State of
Hawaii is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to
read as follows:

"RIGHTS OF VICTIMS OF CRIME

     Section
   .  A victim
of crime shall enjoy the following rights beginning at the time of the victim's
victimization and continuing throughout the criminal justice process:

     1.  To be reasonably protected from the accused;

     2.  To reasonable, accurate and timely notice of
all proceedings related to the criminal conduct;

     3.  To not be excluded from any proceeding
related to the criminal conduct, unless the court, after receiving clear and
convincing evidence, determines that testimony by the victim would be
materially altered if the victim heard other testimony at that proceeding;

     4.  To be reasonably heard at all proceedings
related to the criminal conduct;

     5.  To the reasonable right to confer with the
attorney for the State in the case;

     6.  To full and timely restitution as provided in
law;

     7.  To proceedings free from unreasonable delay;

     8.  To be treated with fairness and with respect
for the victim's dignity and privacy;

     9.  To be informed in a timely manner of any plea
bargain, deferred prosecution agreement or final disposition; and

     10.  To be informed of these rights and other
services available for crime victims.

     In any proceeding
related to the criminal conduct, the court shall ensure that the crime victim
is afforded these rights.

     The crime victim, or the crime
victim's lawful representative, and the attorney for the State may assert these
rights.

     A
person accused of the crime may not obtain any form of relief established by
this section.

     No
right in this section shall be construed to supersede the constitutional rights
of the accused.

     The legislature may enact laws to
further define, implement and preserve the rights established by this section.

     Nothing in this section shall be
construed to create a cause of action against the State or counties, or any of
their agencies, officials or employees.

     As used
herein, "a victim of crime", "crime victim", or
"victim" means any person who suffers direct, proximate or threatened
physical, psychological or financial harm as a result of the commission or
attempted commission of a crime, and shall include the lawful representative of
a victim who is a minor, incompetent, physically or mentally incapacitated or
deceased.  The term does not include the
accused or a person whom the court finds would not act in the best interests of
a minor, incompetent, incapacitated or deceased victim."

    SECTION 3.  The question to be printed on the ballot
shall be as follows:

    "Shall victims of crime be provided
rights in the Constitution of the State of Hawaii, including fair and
respectful treatment throughout the criminal justice process; notification of
critical proceedings, possible plea agreements and case dispositions;
proceedings free from unreasonable delay; the opportunity to be present at all
proceedings related to the criminal conduct; the opportunity to speak at the
sentencing hearing; and financial restitution?"

     SECTION
4.  New constitutional material is
underscored.

     SECTION
5.  This amendment shall take effect upon
compliance with article XVII, section 3, of the Constitution of the State of
Hawaii.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


