

     SECTION
1.  The purpose of this Act is to propose
an amendment to articles II, III, and XVII of the Constitution of the State of
Hawaii to provide for direct initiative.

     SECTION
2.  Article II of the Constitution of the
State of Hawaii is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately
designated and to read as follows:

"INITIATIVE

     Section   .  The initiative power is reserved to the
people.  An initiative measure shall be
submitted to the people by presenting to the chief election officer a petition
containing the signatures of registered voters equaling not less than ten per
cent of the total number of voters who voted for the office of the governor in
the last preceding general election for that office.  The initiative petition shall be filed with
the chief election officer no later than ninety days prior to the general
election at which the initiative is to be submitted directly to the
people.  All initiative measures shall
have printed above the title the following:

"INITIATIVE
MEASURE TO BE

SUBMITTED
DIRECTLY TO THE PEOPLE".

     Each
initiative measure shall embrace but one subject, which shall be expressed in
its title.  The enacting clause shall be:

"BE
IT ENACTED BY THE PEOPLE

OF THE
STATE OF HAWAII".

     The
initiative measure shall be enacted into law when approved by a majority of
votes counted for the measure.  If two or
more conflicting initiative measures are approved by the people at the same
election, the measure receiving the highest number of votes shall prevail.

     No
initiative measure that names any individual to hold any office, or names or
identifies any private corporation to perform any function or to have any power
or duty, shall be submitted or have any effect. 
No initiative measure shall be submitted that pertains to a specific
state budget item.

     An
initiative measure proposing to prohibit a specific activity or to terminate an
existing right or privilege shall be submitted to the people in such a form
that they may vote in the affirmative if they favor the right to engage in the
activity or continuance of the right or privilege.

     No
initiative measure shall be filed with the chief election officer that may be
either similar or contrary in form or essential substance to a bill already
introduced into the legislature.  If
after the adjournment of the legislature sine die, a bill has not become law,
does not carry over or is not adopted to propose an amendment to this
constitution, an initiative measure of either similar or contrary form may be
filed with the chief election officer for submission to the people.

     If,
after an initiative request is made with the attorney general, any bill
introduced into the legislature that may be contrary, as determined by the
attorney general, in form or essential substance to the initiative request is
enacted into law or adopted to propose an amendment to this constitution, that
law or proposed amendment and that initiative measure shall be submitted to the
people in order that they may choose between them, except as provided in this
section.  The contrary law shall remain
in effect pending the general election ballot. 
The measure receiving the highest number of votes shall prevail.  If the initiative measure is approved, the
contrary law or proposed amendment shall be void.  If any law is enacted that is the same or
similar to, and accomplishes the same purpose as an initiative measure, as
determined by the attorney general, the chief election officer shall declare,
by a public announcement, that the initiative measure is void and order it
stricken from the ballot.

     A
defeated initiative measure shall not be resubmitted to the people by the
initiative petition in the same form or essential substance, as determined by
the attorney general, either affirmatively or negatively, for a period of four
years.

     Prior
to the circulation of any initiative petition for signatures, a copy shall be
submitted to the attorney general who shall prepare a title and summary of the
chief purpose and aim of the proposed measure, as well as a clear explanation
written in plain language of the legal effect of a "yes" vote or
"no" vote.

     All
initiative petitions shall be submitted to the chief election officer for
certification.  Each sheet containing
petitioners' signatures shall be attached to the title, summary, and text of
the initiative petition.  No laws shall
be enacted limiting the number of copies of a petition that may be
circulated.  Any registered voter of the
State shall be competent to solicit signatures. 
The petition shall be signed by registered voters.  All signers shall add their address as shown
on their voter registration form and the date upon which they sign the
petition.  Every sheet of the petition
containing signatures shall be verified by affidavit of the petition circulator
that each name on the sheet was signed in the presence of the affiant and that,
in the belief of the affiant, each signer is a registered voter of the
State.  The chief election officer shall
certify that the signers are registered voters of the State.

     The
chief election officer shall not release any petition for inspection by the
public or any governmental agency, except if the supreme court orders
inspection of the petition when a question has been raised regarding the
sufficiency of a petition.  If any
petition under this section has been determined to be insufficient, the
petition shall be returned to the circulators within thirty days of its filing
with the notations of specific insufficiencies.

     An
initiative shall be presented to the people in such a form that a
"yes" vote, on a yes or no ballot, shall indicate an affirmative vote
for the measure as the measure is written.

     The
initiative measure shall be effective, if approved, one day after the election
results are announced, unless otherwise provided for in the measure.

     The
veto power of the governor shall not extend to initiative measures approved by
the people.  No measure enacted by the
people shall be repealed or amended by the legislature without a two-thirds
vote and unless five years have passed from the effective date of the
initiative, unless otherwise provided in the measure; provided that the people
may amend an initiative at any time.

     The
petitioners shall bear all cost of the preparation and circulation of the
petition, except for the services performed by the attorney general under this
section.  After the petition has been
filed with the chief election officer, all further costs shall be part of the
usual expenditures of the State."

     SECTION 3.  Article III, section 1, of the Constitution
of the State of Hawaii is amended to read as follows:

"LEGISLATIVE POWER

     Section
1.  [The] Except as
provided in Article II, Section      , the legislative power of the State
shall be vested in a legislature, which shall consist of two houses, a senate
and a house of representatives[.  Such
power], except that the people reserve to themselves the power of
initiative as set forth in Article II, Section      .  The legislative power shall extend to all rightful
subjects of legislation not inconsistent with this constitution or the
Constitution of the United States."

     SECTION 4.  Article III, section 14, of the Constitution
of the State of Hawaii is amended to read as follows:

"BILLS; ENACTMENT

     Section 14.  No law shall be passed by the legislature
except by bill.  Each law shall embrace
but one subject, which shall be expressed in its title.  The enacting clause of each law shall be,
"Be it enacted by the legislature of the State of Hawaii.""

     SECTION 5.  Article XVII, section 1, of the Constitution
of the State of Hawaii is amended to read as follows:

"METHODS OF PROPOSAL

     Section 1.  Revisions of or amendments to this
constitution may be proposed by constitutional convention or by the
legislature[.] or by the people under Article II, Section      ,
through the initiative process."

     SECTION 6.  Article XVII, section 4, of the Constitution
of the State of Hawaii is amended to read as follows:

"VETO

     Section 4.  No proposal for amendment of the constitution
adopted in either manner provided by this article or by Article II, Section
     , shall be subject to veto by the
governor."

     SECTION 7.  Article XVII, section 5, of the Constitution
of the State of Hawaii is amended to read as follows:

"CONFLICTING REVISIONS OR AMENDMENTS

     Section 5.  If a revision or amendment proposed by a
constitutional convention is in conflict with a revision or amendment proposed
by the legislature and both are submitted to the electorate at the same
election and both are approved, then the revision or amendment proposed by the
convention shall prevail.  If a
revision or amendment proposed by the legislature is in conflict with a
revision or amendment proposed by the people under Article II, Section      ,
by initiative, and both are approved, then the revision or amendment proposed
by initiative shall prevail.  If
conflicting revisions or amendments are proposed by the same body and are
submitted to the electorate at the same election and both are approved, then
the revision or amendment receiving the highest number of votes shall prevail."

     SECTION
8.  The question to be printed on the
ballot shall be as follows:

    "Shall the State Constitution be
amended to provide for initiative?"

     SECTION
9.  Constitutional material to be
repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New
constitutional material is underscored.

     SECTION
10.  This amendment shall take effect
upon compliance with article XVII, section 3, of the Constitution of the State
of Hawaii.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


