

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 371, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is
amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as
follows:

     "§371-    Labor law enforcement special fund;
establishment; purposes.  (a)  There is established in the state treasury
the labor law enforcement special fund into which shall be deposited:

     (1)  All penalties collected pursuant to
section 388-9.7;

     (2)  All penalties collected pursuant to
section 388-10;



     (3)  All civil
penalties assessed pursuant to section 396‑10;

     (4)  Moneys
appropriated by the legislature to the fund; and

     (5)  Any income and
capital gains earned by the fund.

     (b)  The purpose of the special fund is to provide
for sufficient operating costs to collect penalties and fees assessed by the
department.  Moneys in the fund may be
used for:

     (1)  Personnel and operating expenses;

     (2)  Staff development, training, fees,
and expenses; and

     (3)  Litigation
expenses, including but not limited to transcript costs, and interpretation and
translation services.



     (c)  The unencumbered balance of the fund
exceeding $500,000 at the end of every fiscal year shall be deposited into the
general fund on or about June 30 every year."

     SECTION 2.  Section 388-10, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is
amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:

     "(a)  Civil.  Any employer who fails to pay wages in
accordance with this chapter without equitable justification or violates
this chapter or the administrative rules adopted under this chapter shall be
liable:

     (1)  To the employee,
in addition to the wages legally proven to be due, for a sum equal to the
amount of unpaid wages and interest at a rate of six per cent per year from the
date that the wages were due; and

     (2)  For a penalty of
not less than $500 or $100 for each violation, whichever is greater.  The penalty shall be deposited into the [general]
labor law enforcement special fund."

     SECTION 3.  Section 396-10, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is
amended to read as follows:

     "§396-10  Violations and penalties.  (a)  Any employer who violates this chapter, or any
occupational safety and health standard promulgated hereunder or any rule
issued under the authority of this chapter, or who violates or fails to comply
with any citation, notice, or order made under or by virtue of this chapter or
under or by virtue of any rule of the department, or who defaces, displaces,
destroys, damages, or removes without the authority of the department any
safety device, safeguards, notice, or warning required by this chapter or any
rule of the department may be assessed a civil penalty as specified in this
chapter.

     (b) 
Any employer who has received an order or citation for a serious
violation of any standard or rule adopted pursuant to this chapter shall be
assessed a civil penalty of not more than $12,675 for each violation.

     (c) 
Any employer who has received an order or citation for a violation of
any standard or rule adopted pursuant to this chapter, and the violation is
specifically determined not to be of a serious nature, may be assessed a civil
penalty of up to $12,675 for each violation.

     (d) 
Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation
except that during an abatement period only, no additional penalty shall be
levied against the employer.

     (e) 
Any employer who violates any of the posting requirements prescribed
under this chapter shall be assessed a civil penalty of up to $12,675 for each
violation.

     (f) 
Any employer who wilfully or repeatedly violates this chapter, or any
standard, rule, citation, or order issued under the authority of this chapter,
shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more than $126,749 for each violation,
but not less than $9,054 for each wilful violation.

     (g) 
Any employer convicted of wilful or repeated violations of any standard,
rule, citation, or order issued under the authority of this chapter resulting
in the death of an employee shall be punished by a fine of not more than $126,749
or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or both, except that if the
conviction is for a violation committed after a first conviction, punishment
shall be by a fine of not more than $126,749 or by imprisonment for not more
than one year, or both.  Failure to
correct a violation for which an order or citation of arrest has been issued
shall be evidence of wilful conduct.

     (h) 
Any employer who has received an order for violation under section
396-8(e) may be assessed a civil penalty of not more than $9,054 for each
violation.

     (i) 
Any person who gives advance notice of any inspection to be conducted
under this chapter, without authority from the director or the director's
designees shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $9,054
or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both.

     (j) 
The director shall have authority to assess all civil penalties provided
in this section, giving due consideration to the appropriateness of the penalty
with respect to the size of the business of the employer being charged, the
gravity of the violation, the good faith of the employer, and the history of
previous violations.

     (k) 
Civil penalties imposed under this chapter shall be paid to the
department and may be recovered by civil action in the name of the department
and the State brought in the district or circuit court for the circuit where
the violation is alleged to have occurred or where the employer has its
principal office.

     (l) 
When an alleged violation of any provision of this chapter or any
standard, rule, or order made pursuant to this chapter has occurred, the
department shall promptly issue a written citation, order, or notice thereof to
the employer who shall be required to post the citation, order, or notice.  The citation, order, or notice thereof shall
include the abatement requirements and within a reasonable time the employer
shall be advised of the proposed sanctions, including proposed penalties.  Whenever reference is made to posting of any
citation, order, notice, petition, decision, or any other type of document
issued by the director under this chapter and rules adopted pursuant to this
chapter, the employer shall post copies of the document at the work site
involved or affected and at the place or places where notices to the employees
involved are normally posted.  Where
posting starts the time for notice of action to or for appeal by employees
under this chapter and rules adopted under this chapter, the document shall be
posted by the employer upon receipt or on the next business day following
receipt.

     (m) 
Whoever knowingly makes any false statement, representation, or
certification in any application, record, report, plan, or other document filed
or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine of not more than $11,000, or by imprisonment for not more
than six months, or by both.

     (n) 
Criminal offenses committed against any employee of the State acting
within the scope of the employee's office, employment, or authority under this
chapter shall be subject to the penalties set forth in the Hawaii Penal Code;
provided that:

     (1)  Ten years shall be
added to the maximum term of imprisonment (unless life imprisonment is imposed)
and $55,000 shall be added to the maximum fine imposed for conviction of a
class A felony;

     (2)  Five years shall
be added to the maximum term of imprisonment and $27,500 shall be added to the
maximum fine imposed for conviction of a class B felony;

     (3)  Three years shall
be added to the maximum term of imprisonment and $11,000 shall be added to the
maximum fine for conviction of a class C felony;

     (4)  One year shall be
added to the maximum term of imprisonment and $2,200 shall be added to the
maximum fine for conviction of a misdemeanor; and

     (5)  The maximum term
of imprisonment and maximum fines prescribed for misdemeanors under the Hawaii
Penal Code shall apply to convictions of a petty misdemeanor.

     (o) 
The director shall adjust penalties pursuant to the Federal Civil
Penalties Inflation Adjustment Act Improvements Act of 2015, section 701 of
P.L. 114-74, by December 15, 2018, and each year thereafter.  The director shall adjust penalty levels
using the guidance of the Office of Management and Budget and issue the new
penalties by December 15 of each year. 
The new penalties shall take effect the following January 15 of each
year.  The director shall submit a report
to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of each
regular session on the penalty adjustments.

     (p)  All civil penalties collected pursuant to
this section shall be deposited into the labor law enforcement special fund."

     SECTION
4.  The attorney general shall establish
two additional positions, without regard to chapters 76 and 89, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, to carry out the purposes of this Act.  The positions shall include an attorney and a
legal assistant II.

     SECTION
5.  There is appropriated out of the
general fund revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $98,163 or so much as may be necessary
thereof for fiscal year 2018-2019 to be deposited into the labor law
enforcement special fund.

     SECTION
6.  There is appropriated out of the labor
law enforcement special fund the sum of $98,163 or so much thereof as may be
necessary for fiscal year 2018-2019 for the purposes of this Act.

     The sum
appropriated shall be expended by the department of labor and industrial
relations.

     SECTION
7.  Statutory materials to be repealed is
bracketed and stricken.  New statutory
material is underscored.

     SECTION
8.  This Act shall take effect on July 1,
2018.

 

