

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that cybersecurity
is a matter of state and national concern that requires immediate attention,
particularly in the areas of economic development, innovation, education, workforce
development, readiness, and resilience. Cyber vulnerabilities and threats impact
all of Hawaii's residents due to the ubiquity of the State's telecommunications
networks and the Internet.  Critical energy, telecommunication, and water
infrastructures, as well as, financial, tourism, military, and other key public
and private industries are vulnerable to cyber threats.

     The legislature further finds that the State
needs to develop a cyber ecosystem comprising a variety of participants,
including private companies, nonprofit organizations, government, and individuals,
who work together to protect Hawaii from cyber threats.  Important components
of a cyber ecosystem include, but are not limited to:

     (1)  A
comprehensive education curriculum on cybersecurity that spans the State's middle,
intermediate, and high schools, and continues to higher education systems;

     (2)  Workforce
development, including formal classroom education and experiential learning, to
address Hawaii's unmet need for trained cybersecurity personnel;

     (3)  Innovative
approaches to increase Hawaii's preparedness, readiness, and resilience to
cyber threats; and

     (4)  Expansion of Hawaii's innovation economy.

     The purpose of this Act is to establish a cyber
Hawaii pilot project in the office of the vice president for research and
innovation at the University of Hawaii to plan, develop, and implement a cyber
ecosystem that addresses the many aspects of cybersecurity.

     SECTION 2.  (a)  There is established a cyber Hawaii
pilot project in the office of the vice president for research and innovation
at the University of Hawaii that shall plan, develop, and implement a cyber
ecosystem comprising a variety of participants, including private companies,
nonprofit organizations, government, and individuals, to address the many
aspects of cybersecurity.  Important components of a cyber ecosystem include,
but are not limited to:

     (1)  A
comprehensive education curriculum on cybersecurity that spans the State's
middle, intermediate, and high schools, and continues to higher education
systems;

     (2)  Workforce
development, including formal classroom education and experiential learning, to
address Hawaii's unmet need for trained cybersecurity personnel;

     (3)  Innovative
approaches to increase Hawaii's preparedness, readiness, and resilience to
cyber threats; and

     (4)  Expansion of Hawaii's innovation economy.

     (b) 
The cyber Hawaii pilot project shall report its

findings
and recommendations, including the status of its

activities
and proposed legislation, if needed, to the

legislature
no later than twenty days prior to the convening of

the
regular sessions of 2019 and 2020.

     (c)  The cyber Hawaii pilot project shall
terminate on June 30, 2020.

     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the
general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $        
or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2017-2018 and the same
sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2018-2019 for the cyber
Hawaii pilot project to plan, develop, and implement a cyber ecosystem that
addresses the many aspects of cybersecurity.

     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the University
of Hawaii for the purposes of this Act.

     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2017,
and shall be repealed on June 30, 2020.

