

     SECTION 1.  Section 205-4.5, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is
amended by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:

     "(b)  Uses not expressly permitted in
subsection (a) shall be prohibited, except the uses permitted as provided in
sections 205-6 and 205-8, and construction of single-family dwellings on lots
existing before June 4, 1976.  Any other law to the contrary notwithstanding,
no subdivision of land within the agricultural district with soil classified by
the land study bureau's detailed land classification as overall (master)
productivity rating class A or B shall be approved by a county unless those A
and B lands within the subdivision are made subject to the restriction on uses
as prescribed in this section and to the condition that the uses shall be
primarily in pursuit of an agricultural activity.

     Upon final subdivision, sale, or lease, the
owner or occupier shall provide written notice to the land use commission of
the agricultural uses or activities for which the agricultural lands were
subdivided, sold, or leased.  Such written notification shall be provided to
the land use commission within thirty days of the subdivision, sale or lease.

     Any deed,
lease, agreement of sale, mortgage, or other instrument of conveyance covering
any land within the agricultural subdivision shall expressly contain the
restriction on uses and the condition, as prescribed in this section that these
restrictions and conditions shall be encumbrances running with the land until
such time that the land is reclassified to a land use district other than
agricultural district.

     If the foregoing requirement of encumbrances
running with the land jeopardizes the owner or lessee in obtaining mortgage
financing from any of the mortgage lending agencies set forth in the following
paragraph, and the requirement is the sole reason for failure to obtain
mortgage financing, then the requirement of encumbrances shall, insofar as such
mortgage financing is jeopardized, be conditionally waived by the appropriate
county enforcement officer; provided that the conditional waiver shall become
effective only in the event that the property is subjected to foreclosure
proceedings by the mortgage lender.

     The mortgage lending agencies referred to in
the preceding paragraph are the Federal Housing Administration, Federal
National Mortgage Association, Veterans Administration, Small Business
Administration, United States Department of Agriculture, Federal Land Bank of
Berkeley, Federal Intermediate Credit Bank of Berkeley, Berkeley Bank for
Cooperatives, and any other federal, state, or private mortgage lending agency
qualified to do business in Hawaii, and their respective successors and
assigns."

     SECTION 2.  Section 205-12, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended to read as follows:

     "ยง205-12  Enforcement.  [The] (a)  Except
with regard to the enforcement of any conditions, restrictions, uses, or the
subdivision of agricultural land, the appropriate officer or agency charged
with the administration of county zoning laws shall enforce within each county
the use classification districts adopted by the land use commission [and the
restriction on use and the condition relating to agricultural districts under
section 205-4.5 and shall report to the commission all violations]. 

     (b)  The land use commission shall have jurisdiction
over the investigation and enforcement of any violation of any conditions,
restrictions, or uses of agricultural lands.  Any person may report a violation
of section 205-4.5 to the land use commission.

     (c)  The land use commission may enter the
property upon the investigation of a violation, and upon reasonable notice to
the owner or occupier, to investigate for violations of and noncompliance with
the terms of a land use classification reported under subsection (a); provided that
if entry is refused after reasonable notice is given, the land use commission
may apply to the district court of the circuit in which the property is located
for a warrant, directed to any police office of the circuit, commanding the
police officer to provide sufficient aid and to assist the land use commission
in gaining entry onto the property to investigate exempted agricultural
buildings for compliance with the requirements of this section. 

     (d)  If a landowner or occupier does not
comply with any decision and order of the land use commission, or any provision
thereof, the land use commission may issue a cease and desist order, subpoena
the landowner or occupier before the commission for further proceedings, or
both. 

     (e)  If the land use commission finds that
any violation has occurred, the land use commission may issue citations and
assess fines and liens on the property.  The land use commission shall adopt
rules pursuant to chapter 91 to effectuate the purposes of this section."

     SECTION 3.  Statutory material to be repealed
is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.

     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2050.

