

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds, as declared in the
World Conservation Congress Hawai‘i
Commitments of 2016, that "[w]e must undertake profound transformations in
how human societies live on Earth, with particular attention to making our
patterns of production and consumption more sustainable.  We must recognize that human health and
wellbeing depend on healthy ecosystems. 
We must recognize that every form of life has value – regardless of its
worth to humans."  Hawai‘i has been a leader in
conservation efforts for decades, through its commitment to environmental and
sustainability policies.  In the 1970s,
the State enacted the State Environmental Policy, chapter 344, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, as a mechanism to set environmental goals.  While comprehensive, it lacked measurable
indicators and enforcement means.  Our
understanding of the challenges facing our natural environment worldwide have
changed remarkably since the 1970s and the laws enacted in Hawai‘i in recent decades have
served as a starlight for other jurisdictions and set a global example on how
to adopt policies on sustainability. 
More recently, several approaches to sustainability have emerged in
Hawai‘i, including the
Aloha+ Challenge, the governor's Sustainable Hawai‘i Initiative, and other initiatives inspired
by the Mālama
Honua Worldwide Voyage and Mālama
Hawai‘i.

     In July of 2014, the State launched
the Aloha+ Challenge, a statewide commitment to sustainability, with the
leadership of the governor, four county mayors, Office of Hawaiian Affairs,
legislature, and Hawai‘i
Green Growth public-private partners across the State.  The
Aloha+ Challenge: He Nohona ‘Ae‘oia, A
Culture of Sustainability, builds on Hawai‘i's
history of systems thinking, Hawaiian culture and values, and successful track
record on sustainability to outline six ambitious goals to be achieved by 2030:

     (1)  Clean energy:  Achieve seventy per cent clean energy, with
forty per cent from renewables and thirty per cent from efficiency;

     (2)  Local food:  At least double local food production for
local consumption;

     (3)  Natural resource
management:  Reverse the trend of natural
resource loss mauka to makai by increasing freshwater security, watershed
protection, community-based marine management, invasive species control, and
restoration of native species;

     (4)  Waste
reduction:  Reduce the solid waste stream
prior to disposal by seventy per cent through source reduction, recycling,
bioconversion, and landfill diversion methods;

     (5)  Smart sustainable
communities:  Increase livability and
resilience in the built environment through planning and implementation at the
state and county levels; and

     (6)  Green workforce
and education:  Increase local green jobs
and education to implement these goals.

     To increase the efforts of the
Aloha+ Challenge, the governor launched the Sustainable Hawai‘i Initiative in 2016, which
includes five goals:

     (1)  Double local food
production by 2020;

     (2)  Implement Hawai‘i's interagency biosecurity
plan by 2027;

     (3)  Protect thirty per
cent of the highest priority watersheds by 2030;

     (4)  Manage thirty per
cent of nearshore ocean waters by 2030; and

     (5)  Achieve one
hundred per cent renewable energy in electricity by 2045.

     In May of
2014, Hōkūle‘a began a three-year voyage
across the world's oceans carrying the message of Mālama Honua – to care for the earth.  Building on the legacy of the Polynesian way
finders, the Hōkūle‘a Worldwide Voyage inspired
actions of conservation across the Hawaiian Islands and beyond, resulting in
the connection of a lei of aloha around the globe.

     At the global level, the United
Nations Sustainable Development Goals, the World Conservation Congress Hawai‘i Commitments of 2016, and
the Paris Climate Agreement have been adopted to guide global efforts.  The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),
otherwise known as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, were born at
the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development in Rio de Janeiro in
2012, came into force in 2015, and are a universal call to action to end
poverty, protect the planet, and ensure that all people enjoy peace and
prosperity.  The seventeen SDGs are
interconnected and work in the spirit of partnership and pragmatism to make the
right choices now to improve life, in a sustainable way, for future generations.  They provide a clear framework for action to
guide countries in accordance with their own priorities and the environmental
challenges of the world at large.  They
tackle the root causes of poverty and unite us together to make a positive
change for both people and planet.

     Dealing with the threat of climate
change impacts how we manage our fragile natural resources, achieving gender
equality and better health helps eradicate poverty, and fostering peace and
inclusive societies will reduce inequalities and help economies prosper.  The SDGs are voluntary commitments to make
the world a better and more prosperous place.

     During September 2016, over ten
thousand leaders from government, civil society, indigenous communities, faith
and spiritual traditions, the private sector, and academia gathered in Hawai‘i for a meeting of the International
Union for Conservation of Nature World Conservation Congress.  Delegates to the Congress adopted the World
Conservation Congress Hawai‘i
Commitments to achieve the transformation required to promote a "Culture
of Conservation".  The Hawai‘i Commitments consist of
seven identified challenges and proposed solutions, including:

     (1)  Linking
spirituality, religion, culture, and conservation;

     (2)  Engaging and
empowering youth;

     (3)  The challenge of
sustaining the global food supply and conserving nature;

     (4)  The challenge of
preserving the health of the world ocean;

     (5)  The challenge of
ending wildlife trafficking;

     (6)  The challenge of
engaging with the private sector; and

     (7)  The challenge of
climate change.

The Hawai‘i
Commitments build on the Paris Climate Agreement and the SDGs to allow
different global voices to come together and find common ground in the spirit
of partnership, collaboration, and sustainability.

     In order for Hawai‘i to continue to serve as a
starlight for the rest of the world in setting policies on sustainability and
to serve as global leader on issues of conservation and sustainability, it is
essential that the State demonstrate its full commitment to its own policies
and goals as well as the goals set on the international stage at United Nations
conferences and summits on sustainability.

     Therefore, the purpose of this Act
is to codify the State's commitment to conservation and sustainability by
including goal sixteen, relating to peace, justice, and strong institutions, of
the seventeen United Nations SDGs and indicators, with references to existing
state sustainability programs, if applicable, in the Hawaii Revised Statutes.

     SECTION 2.  Chapter 344, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended
by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:

     "§344-    Sustainable development goals; peace,
justice, and strong institutions.  In pursuance of the State's sustainability
goals, and notwithstanding any law to the contrary, all agencies shall, insofar
as practicable, take action to assist the State in achieving the sustainable
development goal of promoting peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable
development; providing access to justice for all; and building effective,
accountable, and inclusive institutions at all levels by 2030 by:

     (1)  Significantly
reducing all forms of violence and related death rates statewide;

     (2)  Ending abuse,
exploitation, trafficking, and all forms of violence against and torture of individuals;

     (3)  Promoting the
rule of law at all levels and ensuring equal access to justice for all;

     (4)  Significantly
reducing illicit financial and arms flows, strengthening the recovery and
return of stolen assets, and combating all forms of organized crime;

     (5)  Substantially
reducing corruption and bribery in all their forms;

     (6)  Developing
effective, accountable, and transparent institutions at all levels;

     (7)  Ensuring
responsive, inclusive, participatory, and representative decision-making at all
levels;

     (8)  Broadening and
strengthening the participation of citizens in the institutions of state and
local governance;

     (9)  Ensuring public
access to information and protecting fundamental freedoms; and

    (10)  Strengthening
relevant state institutions to prevent violence and combating terrorism and
crime."

     SECTION
3.  New statutory material is
underscored.

     SECTION
4.  This Act shall take effect upon its
approval.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


