

SECTION 1. The legislature
finds that the Hawaii Public Procurement Code requires bid proposals to include
the name and scope of work of subcontractors and joint contractors that will be
used on a public works project.  Time constraints between the time a bidder
receives all subcontractor bids and the bid submission deadline, as well as the
complexity of licensing requirements, can cause inadvertent failure by a bidder
to list a required subcontractor or cause a bidder to list an improperly
licensed subcontractor in a bid.  Oftentimes these technical mistakes in a
lowest bidder's proposal results in a bid challenge, thus delaying the
execution and delivery of public works projects.  Many recent bid challenges
have been based on the failure to list a required subcontractor or licensing
scope of work issues.  As a result of bid challenges, projects are delayed,
funding lapses, and inflation increases final project costs.

     The legislature further finds that the
contractors license board recognizes over one hundred different specialty
contractor licenses that a prime bidder must sort through to determine the
appropriate subcontractor specialty to be listed on a bid.  The legislature
additionally finds that in comparison, the federal government does not require
the listing of subcontractors on any bid proposal and the 2000 American Bar
Association's Model Procurement Code, the model for the Hawaii Public
Procurement Code, does not include a subcontractor listing requirement.  Twenty
states and the federal government do not even require a general contractor's
license to bid on or perform construction work.  While subcontractor listing
proponents cite legislative intent and the deterrent of bid shopping and bid
peddling in support of the listing requirement, it is evident from the number
of awards to non-low bidders and increased costs of construction due to the
subcontractor listing discrepancies that the listing requirement can result in
consequences that the legislature did not intend.  Providing prime contractors
with additional time to submit a subcontractor list would facilitate the
legislature's intent of ensuring that subcontractors are listed properly on the
bid submittal and are licensed and qualified in the scope and nature of the
work to be performed.

     The purpose of this Act is to minimize bid
challenges, costs, and delays of public works construction projects, by
providing a bidder of a public works construction project with:

     (1)  Two working days after the closing of a bid to
provide the name of each person or firm to be engaged by the bidder as a joint
contractor or subcontractor in the performance of the contract and the nature
and scope of the work to be performed by each; and 

     (2)  The opportunity to substitute subcontractors in
certain instances, provided that the price of the total bid remains the same. 

     SECTION 2.  Section 103D-302, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended as follows:

     1.   By amending subsection (b) to read:

     "(b)  An invitation for bids shall be
issued, and shall include a purchase description and all contractual terms and
conditions applicable to the procurement.  If the invitation for bids is for
construction, it shall [specify]:

(1)  Specify
that all bids include the name of each person or firm to be engaged by the
bidder as a joint contractor or subcontractor in the performance of the contract
and the nature and scope of the work to be performed by each[.]; and

(2)  Allow
the bidder:

         (A)  Two working days after the
closing of the invitation for bids to provide the information required by
paragraph (1); and  

         (B)  The opportunity to substitute a
subcontractor that is not in compliance with the requirements of paragraph (1)
with another subcontractor that is in compliance with the requirements of
paragraph (1) within two days after the closing of the invitation for bids,
provided that the price of the total bid remains the same.

Construction bids that do not comply with [this
requirement] these requirements may be accepted if acceptance is in
the best interest of the State and the value of the work to be performed by the
joint contractor or subcontractor is equal to or less than one per cent of the
total bid amount."

     2.   By amending subsection (d) to read:

     "(d)  Bids shall be opened publicly in the
presence of one or more witnesses, at the time and place designated in the
invitation for bids[.]; provided that if the bid is for construction,
it shall be opened no sooner than two working days after the closing of the
invitation for bids.  The amount of each bid and other relevant information
specified by rule, together with the name of each bidder shall be recorded. 
The record and each bid shall be open to public inspection."

     SECTION 3.  Statutory material to be repealed
is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.

     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its
approval.

 


 
  
  INTRODUCED BY:
  
  
  _____________________________
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 


