

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that pollution
from land-based sources is a primary cause of coral reef degradation throughout
the world.  In particular, research shows that raw human waste contain microbes
that are responsible for coral diseases, such as white pox and black band
disease, that are capable of devastating large patches of reef.  In recent
years, Hawaii has experienced numerous wastewater spills that have released raw
sewage into the ocean.  These have ranged from an estimated ten thousand
gallons in 2016 to five hundred thousand gallons in 2015.  The legislature
believes that understanding the environmental impacts of wastewater spills is
critical to better protecting Hawaii's coral reef ecosystems.

     SECTION 2.  Chapter 304A, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to part IV, subpart G, to be
appropriately designated and to read as follows:

     "ยง304A-     Coral reefs;
duties of the center.  (a)  The environmental center shall conduct
ongoing studies of the environmental impacts of sewage spills on affected coral
reefs.  Studies shall include damage evaluations, identification of diseases,
and recommendations for mitigating detrimental effects.

     (b)  The environmental center shall submit
an annual report on its findings pursuant to this section to the legislature no
later than twenty days prior to the convening of each regular session.  The
reports may include proposed legislation."

     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the
general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $       or so much thereof
as may be necessary for fiscal year 2017-2018 and the same sum or so much
thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2018-2019 to conduct ongoing
studies on the environmental impact of sewage spills on coral reefs.

     The sums appropriated shall be expended
by the University of Hawaii for the purposes of this Act.

     SECTION 4.  New statutory material is
underscored.

     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect on January
28, 2081.

