

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the
increase in popularity of online vacation rental platforms means that some
visitors to Hawaii are turning to alternative lodging options, such as
short-term vacation rentals, as part of their accommodations to the State.  As
a result, online vacation rental platforms are disrupting the State's tourism
industry and economy, as the owners and operators of some of these short-term
vacation rentals are not paying transient accommodations taxes or general
excise taxes, resulting in a loss of state revenue.  Counties are also losing
revenue when an owner of a vacation rental receives "home owners"
discounts on property taxes paid for a residential home that is used for
commercial purposes without a commercial property rate.  Furthermore, some
properties that are being leased out as vacation rentals are properties that
could have been added to the stock of affordable housing available for lease or
sale to Hawaii's residents, thereby ameliorating the State's affordable housing
crisis.  From a consumer protection perspective, visitors who stay in vacation
rentals may not be getting what is advertised, as some vacation rentals are
falsely advertised and even unsafe for group occupancy.  Unsafe stays and
unfavorable reviews or references of such stays can be detrimental to Hawaii's
reputation as an elite tourist destination.

     The legislature further finds that the
regulation of short-term vacation rentals has been contentious not only in
Hawaii, but other places as well.  For example, the city of San Francisco
recently passed legislation that subjects hosting platforms, including online
vacation rental platforms, to criminal penalties and fines if they provide a
booking service for residential units to be used for tourist or transient use
without registering with the appropriate government entity.  As a result, there
is currently pending litigation between online vacation rental platforms and
the city of San Francisco in federal court.

     Because online vacation rental platforms affect
state and county interests in many ways, it is critical that data collection on
this industry be accurate, timely, and informative.  The collection of the
transient accommodations tax and general excise tax is the responsibility of
the State, but the counties receive a large portion of the transient accommodations
tax and the city and county of Honolulu additionally receives most of the
surcharge on the general excise tax for a rail transit system.  The State has a
vested interest in effectively and independently monitoring whether persons
engaging in online short-term vacation rentals are paying taxes owed. 
Additionally, the State and counties share an interest in identifying and
tracking the number of housing units that are dedicated to short-term vacation
rentals and calculating the projected short- and long-term impacts that these
rentals have on existing housing for Hawaii residents.  Lastly, better data
collection on online short-term vacation rentals will better ensure adherence
to laws and codes that protect the safety of occupants and help perpetuate
Hawaii's brand as a high-quality and safe vacation destination.

     The purpose of this Act is to establish an
online vacation rental working group to develop effective data collection
methods that can assist state and county governments in monitoring the impact
that short-term vacation rentals have on tax collections, housing stock, and
the State's brand as a vacation destination.

     SECTION 2.  (a)  There is established an online
vacation rental working group that shall be administratively attached to the
department of business, economic development, and tourism.

     (b)  The online vacation rental working group
shall consist of the following members:

     (1)  The director of taxation, or the director's
designee;

     (2)  The director of commerce and consumer affairs, or
the director's designee;

     (3)  The attorney general, or the attorney general's
designee;

     (4)  The president and chief executive officer of the
Hawaii tourism authority, or the president and chief executive officer's
designee;

     (5)  A representative of the Hawaii hotel and lodging
industry to be selected by the Hawaii Lodging and Tourism Association;

     (6)  A representative of the Hawaii Association of REALTORS;

     (7)  A representative of Unite Here, Local 5;

     (8)  Two representatives from businesses that operate
short-term rental internet platforms, to be selected by the governor;

     (9)  Two individuals who operate currently licensed
short-term vacation rentals in good standing in residential communities in the
State, to be selected by the governor;

    (10)  Two members of publicly elected community
organizations, such as neighborhood boards, who are from communities with a
higher-than-average number of vacation rentals listed online, to be selected by
the governor;

    (11)  One representative from each respective county,
to be appointed by its respective county mayor;

    (12)  One individual to be appointed by the senate
president; and

    (13)  One individual to be appointed by the speaker of
the house of representatives.

     (c)  The members of the online vacation rental
working group shall select the chairperson of the working group from among
themselves.  Members of the online vacation rental working group shall serve
without compensation for their service on the working group but may be
reimbursed for reasonable expenses, including travel expenses, incurred for
serving on the working group.

     (d)  The online vacation rental working group
shall:

     (1)  Develop effective data collection, including:

         (A)  Establishing a means by which counties and
state government can monitor the number of units being offered as part-time and
full-time vacation rentals and the number of multi-unit operators versus
in-home operators;

         (B)  Projecting growth and locations of
vacation rental markets by region; and

         (C)  Identifying impacts, if any, on local and
regional real estate markets, long-term rental housing availability and rate of
rents, and property tax rates; and

     (2)  Create effective proposals in which
government-subsidized rental housing and long-term leasehold housing can be
assured to remain in long-term rental or eligible rental use for a mandatory
time period.

     (e)  The online vacation rental working group
shall submit a report of its findings, recommendations, and proposed
legislation to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening
of the regular session of 2018, and shall be dissolved on June 30, 2018.

     (f)  The online vacation rental working group
may call upon various state and county government entities to assist with
gathering information and drafting of its report, including the department of
business, economic development, and tourism's research and economic analysis
division; housing officers at state and county levels; and planning officials
at state and county levels.

     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the
general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of
$           or so much
thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2017-2018 for the online vacation
rental working group to perform its duties pursuant to this Act.

     The sum appropriated shall be expended
by the department of business, economic development, and tourism for the
purposes of this Act.

     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July
1, 2017.

