17LSO-0144
AN ACT relating to the legislature; specifying authority of
the legislature to employ staff; specifying conditions of
employment; and providing for an effective date.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Wyoming:
Section 1.    W.S. 28-1-103, 28-3-103 and 28-4-103 are
amended to read:
28-1-103.    Additional employees.
At any time during the session of the legislature when the
employment of additional persons may be necessary for the
efficient    performance    of    the     duties   imposed   upon   the
legislature, the senate and house of representatives are
hereby authorized to employ such additional employees.              All
SF0029
STATE OF WYOMING                    17LSO-0144
persons employed by either house shall at all times serve
at the will of the presiding officer of that house.
28-3-103.     Employees generally.
(a)   At    the     beginning     of   each    session     of    the
legislature, the senate thereof shall engage such employee
personnel    for    said    session,    upon respective     compensation
bases, as decided by it.
(b)   The senate may authorize personnel to be employed
beyond the adjournment of the session in order to complete
recordkeeping of each session and prepare for each session
of the legislature.          The president of the senate, subject
to     legislative         appropriation,     shall      establish      the
compensation of any staff so employed whose duties shall be
performed under the direction of the president.
28-4-103.     Employees generally.
(a)   At    the     beginning     of   each    session     of    the
legislature,       the   house   of    representatives    thereof      shall
SF0029
STATE OF WYOMING                        17LSO-0144
engage    such    employee     personnel       for   said     session,   upon
respective compensation bases, as decided by it.
(b)   The house may authorize personnel to be employed
beyond the adjournment of the session in order to complete
recordkeeping of each session and prepare for each session
of the legislature.           The speaker of the house, subject to
legislative appropriation, shall establish the compensation
of any staff so employed whose duties shall be performed
under the direction of the speaker.
Section    2.   This    act    is   effective     immediately     upon
completion of all acts necessary for a bill to become law
as     provided   by   Article       4,    Section   8   of    the   Wyoming
Constitution.
(END)
SF0029