ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0023

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 48, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




AN ACT relating to the secretary of state; modifying time
period, publication and notice requirements relating to
business entities; amending requirements for the secretary
of state to publish certain documents; removing requirement
for the secretary of state to distribute copies of the
election code to county clerks; accordingly repealing the
requirement   that county clerks distribute       copies of
election    code   to   election   judges;    providing  an
appropriation; and providing for an effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Wyoming:

     Section 1. W.S. 9-1-303(d)(intro) and by creating a
new    subsection    (e),    17-10-204(e),    17-16-125(c),
17-21-1101(f)(ii), 17-23-111, 17-29-705(a) and 22-2-120 are
amended to read:

     9-1-303. Powers and duties; affixing seal to and
countersigning commissions and documents; certified copies
of acts; file of commissions and appointments; publication
of documents.

     (d) The secretary of state shall print make the
following documents and make those documents available to
the public upon tender of fees prescribed by rule and
regulation, which fees shall be sufficient to the extent
practical to recover the secretary of state's cost of the
document provided by publishing the documents on the
secretary of state's official website:

     (e) The secretary of state shall print and make
available the constitution of the state of Wyoming upon
payment of a fee established by rule and in an amount to
recover the costs of printing the document.



                              1
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0023

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 48, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION



     17-10-204. Registered    agent;   change   of   registered
office or registered agent.

     (e) If any cooperative has failed for thirty (30)
days to appoint and maintain a registered agent in this
state, or has failed for thirty (30) days after change of
its registered office or registered agent to file in the
office of the secretary of state a statement of the change
it shall be deemed to be transacting business within this
state   without   authority   and  to   have    forfeited   any
franchises, rights or privileges acquired under the laws
thereof and the forfeiture shall be made effective in the
following manner. The secretary of state shall mail by
certified first class mail, or by electronic means if the
cooperative     has    consented     to     receive     notices
electronically, a notice of its failure to comply with
aforesaid provisions. Unless compliance is made within
thirty (30) days of the delivery of mailing or electronic
submission of the notice, the cooperative shall be deemed
defunct   and   to   have   forfeited   its   certificate    of
organization acquired under the laws of this state.
Provided, that any defunct cooperative may at any time
within two    (2) years     after the forfeiture of         its
certificate, in the manner herein provided, be revived and
reinstated, by filing the necessary statement under this
act and paying a reinstatement fee established by the
secretary of state by rule, together with a penalty of one
hundred dollars ($100.00). The reinstatement fee shall not
exceed the costs of providing the reinstatement service.
The cooperative shall retain its registered name during the
two (2) year reinstatement period under this section.

     17-16-125.   Filing duty of secretary of state.

     (c) If the secretary of state refuses to file a
document, he shall return it to the domestic or foreign


                                 2
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0023

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 48, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION



corporation or its representative within five (5) fifteen
(15) days after the document was delivered, together with a
brief, written explanation of the reason for his refusal.

     17-21-1101.   Registered       limited       liability
partnerships.

     (f) Registration is effective immediately upon the
filing of a statement of registration or at any later date
or time specified in the statement of registration, and
remains effective until:

          (ii) Sixty (60) days after the first date of
publication by the office of the secretary of state of
notice by the secretary of state that the partnership has
failed to make timely payment of the annual fee specified
in subsection (n) of this section or has failed to pay any
penalties imposed under W.S. 17-28-109, unless the fee and
any penalties are paid within the sixty (60) day period, or
that the partnership is without a registered agent or
registered office in this state, unless the partnership
regains a registered agent or registered office in this
state during the sixty (60) day period.     The secretary of
state shall mail such notice by certified first class mail
to the last known mailing address of the partnership and
shall publish the notice once a week for two (2)
consecutive weeks, in a newspaper of general circulation in
the county    in which      the registered office of     the
partnership is located or by electronic means if the
partnership     has     consented    to   receive    notices
electronically.     Notwithstanding any other provisions of
this paragraph, any domestic registered limited liability
partnership whose statement of registration has lapsed
under this paragraph may be reinstated as provided in W.S.
17-21-1107.



                                3
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0023

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 48, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION



     17-23-111. Failure to maintain    registered   agent   or
registered office or pay annual fee.

If any statutory trust has failed to comply with the
provisions of W.S. 17-28-101 through 17-28-111 or has
failed to pay the fee required by W.S. 17-23-117, it is
transacting business within this state without authority
and shall forfeit any franchises, rights or privileges
acquired under the laws of this state.       The forfeiture
shall be made effective in the following manner.        The
secretary of state shall mail by certified first class
mail, or by electronic means if the statutory trust has
consented to receive notices electronically, a notice of
its failure to comply.     Unless compliance is made within
sixty (60) days of the delivery of mailing or electronic
submission of the notice, the statutory trust shall be
deemed defunct and to have forfeited its certificate of
organization acquired under the laws of this state.     Any
defunct statutory trust may at any time within two (2)
years after the forfeiture of its certificate, be revived
and reinstated, by filing the necessary statement under
this chapter and paying the prescribed fee, together with a
penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00). The statutory
trust shall retain its registered name during the two (2)
year reinstatement period.

     17-29-705. Administrative forfeiture of authority and
articles of organization.

     (a) If any limited liability company's registered
agent has filed its resignation with the secretary of state
and the limited liability company has not replaced its
registered agent and registered office, or the limited
liability company is without a registered agent or
registered office in this state for any reason, it shall be
deemed to be transacting business within this state without


                               4
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0023

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 48, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION



authority and to have forfeited any franchises, rights or
privileges acquired under the laws thereof and the
forfeiture shall be made effective in the following manner.
The secretary of state shall mail by certified first class
mail, or by electronic means if the limited liability
company has consented to receive notices electronically, a
notice of its failure to comply with aforesaid provisions.
Unless compliance is made within sixty (60) days of the
delivery of mailing or electronic submission of the notice,
the limited liability company shall be deemed defunct and
to have forfeited its articles of organization acquired
under the laws of this state. Provided, that any defunct
limited liability company may at any time within two (2)
years after the forfeiture of its articles of organization
or certificate of authority, in the manner herein provided,
be revived and reinstated, by filing the necessary
statement under this act and paying a reinstatement fee
established by the secretary of state by rule, together
with a penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). The
reinstatement fee shall not exceed the costs of providing
the reinstatement service.    The limited liability company
shall retain its registered name during the two (2) year
reinstatement period under this section.

    22-2-120.     Publication of Election Code.

The secretary of state, not later than the first of July in
general election years, shall distribute copies of publish
the Election Code to county and municipal clerks on the
secretary of state's official website.

    Section 2.     W.S. 22-12-107(a)(ix) is repealed.

     Section  3. There    is  appropriated   five  thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) from the general fund to the secretary
of state. This appropriation shall only be expended for the


                                  5
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0023

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 48, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION



purpose of printing the constitution of the state of
Wyoming as required under W.S. 9-1-303(e) as created by
this act. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, this
appropriation shall not be transferred or expended for any
other   purpose and any unexpended,     unobligated  funds
remaining from this appropriation shall revert as provided
by law on June 30, 2018. This appropriation shall be
included in the secretary of state's 2019-2020 standard
biennial budget request.

     Section 4.   This act is effective July 1, 2017.

                             (END)




Speaker of the House                  President of the Senate


                           Governor

                  TIME APPROVED: _________

                  DATE APPROVED: _________

I hereby certify that this act originated in the House.




Chief Clerk




                                 6
