17LSO-0315
AN ACT relating to statutory gender designations; amending
archaic     language;    codifying       rights       of     parties    legally
authorized to marry in Wyoming; providing definitions; and
providing for an effective date.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Wyoming:
Section    1.    W.S.      1-6-108,           1-12-104,         1-20-107,
1-22-104(b),      2-3-135,       2-4-106,         2-6-118,          2-7-501(a),
2-7-502,    4-10-402(c)(intro),          (i)   and     (d),    8-1-102(a)      by
creating     a   new      paragraph        (xvii),          14-1-201(a)(iii),
14-2-308(a)(vii),         14-2-402(a)(viii)(A)                and       (xiii),
14-2-501(a)(intro),       (ii),      (iii),       by        creating     a    new
paragraph    (iv),     (b)(intro),       (v)   and     by    creating     a   new
subsection       (c),          14-2-802(a)(ii),               14-2-803(a)(i),
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                         17LSO-0315
14-2-816(a)(vi),             14-2-822(a),          14-2-823(c)(i),               (ii),
(g)(intro), (ii), (iv), (vi), (vii), (ix), (m)(intro) and
(vii),         14-2-903,        14-2-904,         14-2-905(a)            and     (b),
14-3-210(a)(i),             14-3-402(a)(xiii),               14-6-201(a)(xvii),
14-6-402(a)(xiv),               15-5-206,         15-5-309(b),            15-5-312,
18-5-303(a)(x),             19-14-102(a),         20-1-101,          20-1-102(c),
20-1-106(b),          20-1-201,       20-2-101(d)       and       (e),    20-2-102,
20-3-103,            20-3-104,        20-4-166(j),            20-4-170(b)(vii),
20-5-410(d), 34-1-109, 34-1-110, 34-1-129, 34-1-142(c)(v),
34-2-121,       35-1-410(c)(iii),           35-1-411(a)(intro),           (ii)    and
(b) through (d), 35-1-422(a), 37-9-504 and 40-14-349 are
amended to read:
1-6-108.       Lis pendens;       notice of pendency of action
affecting real property or action between spouses.
In   an    action      in   a   state    court     or   in    a    United      States
district court affecting the title or right of possession
of real property, or in an action between husband and wife
spouses, the plaintiff at the time of filing the complaint
and the defendant at the time of filing his a pleading when
affirmative relief is claimed or at any time afterward, may
file      in   the    office     of   the    county     clerk      in    which    the
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                    17LSO-0315
property is      situate a      notice    of pendency of         the   action
containing     the names      of the     parties,       the object of     the
action or defense and a description of the property in that
county affected thereby as provided by W.S. 1-6-107. From
the time of filing the notice a subsequent purchaser or
encumbrancer of the property shall have constructive notice
of the pendency of the action.
1-12-104.   Spouses as witnesses in civil and criminal
cases.
No husband or wife shall be a witness against the other
spouse except in criminal proceedings for a crime committed
by     one   against   the     other,    or   in    a    civil   action    or
proceeding by one against the other. They may in all civil
and criminal cases be witnesses for each other the same as
though the marital relation did not exist.
1-20-107.   Exemptions when head of family dies.
Whenever the head of a family dies, deserts, or ceases to
reside with the family, the family is entitled to all the
benefits and privileges conferred upon the head of a family
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                          17LSO-0315
residing     with   the    same,    and    the   family,      or     any    member
thereof, may select the property claimed as exempt. Where
the exempt property is the sole and separate property of
the wife remaining spouse, it is, to the same extent and
for    all   purposes,      exempt       for   the    debts     of    the     wife
remaining spouse.
1-22-104.     Petition      for    adoption     of   minor;      by    whom
filed;       requisites;      confidential            nature;        inspection;
separate journal to be kept.
(b)   A petition may be filed by any single adult or
jointly by a husband and wife married couple who maintain
their home together, or by either the husband or wife one
spouse if the other spouse is a parent of the child.
2-3-135.     Petition for revocation by prior claimant;
prior right of surviving spouse.
When   letters      of    administration       have    been     granted      to   a
child, father, mother, brother or sister of the intestate,
the surviving spouse may assert his or her prior right and
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                      17LSO-0315
obtain   letters     of   administration     and   have       the       letters
before granted revoked.
2-4-106.    Divorce not to affect children's rights.
Divorces of       husband and wife    parents      do   not    affect       the
right of children to inherit their parents' property.
2-6-118.    Revocation by divorce or annulment; effect;
revival; other changes excluded.
If after executing a will the testator is divorced or his
the marriage is annulled, the divorce or annulment revokes
any disposition or appointment of property made by the will
to the former spouse, any provision conferring a general or
special power of appointment on the former spouse, and any
nomination    of    the   former   spouse    as    executor,        trustee,
conservator or guardian, unless the will expressly provides
otherwise.    Property    prevented   from    passing     to        a    former
spouse because of revocation by divorce or annulment passes
as if the former spouse failed to survive the decedent, and
other provisions conferring some power or office on the
former spouse are interpreted as if the spouse failed to
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                             17LSO-0315
survive the decedent. If provisions are revoked solely by
this section, they are revived by testator's remarriage to
the former spouse. For purposes of this section, divorce or
annulment       means     any        divorce          or   annulment     which      would
exclude      the   spouse       as    a    surviving        spouse.      A   decree   of
separation which does not terminate the status of husband
and wife a marriage is not a divorce for purposes of this
section. No change of circumstances other than as described
in this section revokes a will.
2-7-501.       Right to homestead and support; "homestead"
defined.
(a)     When   a   person          dies    leaving      a   spouse     or    minor
children,      the    spouse     or       minor        children    are   entitled      to
remain in possession of the homestead, all wearing apparel
of the family, and all household furniture of the decedent
until letters are granted and the inventory is returned.
The    widow    surviving        spouse          or    minor   children       are    also
entitled to a reasonable provision for their support, to be
allowed by the court.
2-7-502.       Extra allowance for maintenance of family.
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                  17LSO-0315
If the amount set apart is insufficient for the support of
the widow surviving spouse and children, or either, the
court   shall      make   such   reasonable   allowance    out   of   the
estate as is necessary for the maintenance of the family
according to their circumstances during the settlement of
the estate.
4-10-402.     Title of trust property.
(c)   Any property of a husband and wife that is held
by them spouses hold as tenants by the entireties pursuant
to W.S. 34-1-140 and conveyed to their joint revocable or
irrevocable     trusts,     or   to   their   separate    revocable   or
irrevocable trusts, shall have the same immunity from the
claims of their separate creditors as it would if it had
remained held by the entireties, so long as:
(i)    They are both living and remain as husband
and wife married to each other;
(d)   After the death of the first of the husband and
wife spouses to die, all property held in trust that was
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                         17LSO-0315
immune from the claims of the decedent's separate creditors
under subsection (c) of this section immediately prior to
the    decedent's      death   shall    continue          to   have   the     same
immunity      from     the   claims     of       the     decedent's    separate
creditors as would have existed if the husband and wife
spouses      had   continued   to     hold       the    property   conveyed     in
trust, or its proceeds, as tenants by the entirety.
8-1-102.       Definitions.
(a)    As used in the statutes unless the legislature
clearly specifies a different meaning or interpretation or
the context clearly requires a different meaning:
(xvii)    "Spouse"      means       a     marriage    partner,     a
husband or a wife.
14-1-201.       Definitions.
(a)    As used in this article:
(iii)     "Parent"     means        the    legal     guardian     or
custodian of the minor, his natural parent, or if the minor
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING            17LSO-0315
has been legally adopted, the adoptive parent, a person
adjudged the parent of the child in judicial proceedings or
a person established as the parent under title 14, chapter
2, article 5;
14-2-308.      Definitions.
(a)     As used in this act:
(vii)       "Parent" means a natural parent, or a parent by
adoption,      a    person   adjudged   the parent of the child   in
judicial proceedings or a person established as the parent
under title 14, chapter 2, article 5;
14-2-402.      Definitions.
(a)     As used in this act:
(viii)     "Donor" means an individual who produces
eggs or sperm used for assisted reproduction, whether or
not for consideration. The term does not include:
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                 17LSO-0315
(A)       A husband who provides sperm, or a wife
who provides eggs, to be used for assisted reproduction by
the wife within the marriage;
(xiii)      "Parent-child         relationship"    means    the
legal   relationship          between a   child    and   a parent of    the
child. The term includes the a mother-child relationship
and the a father-child relationship;
14-2-501.        Establishment of parent-child relationship.
(a)   The    A    mother-child     relationship    is   established
between a woman and a child by:
(ii)       An adjudication of the woman's maternity;
or
(iii)       Adoption of the child by the woman;. or
(iv)       The   woman's   having    consented    to   assisted
reproduction by her spouse under article 9 of this act,
which resulted in the birth of the child.
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                          17LSO-0315
(b)   The    A    father-child      relationship         is    established
between a man and a child by:
(v)    The     man's       having    consented          to    assisted
reproduction       by    his     wife    spouse    or    a     surrogate        under
article 8 9 of this act which resulted in the birth of the
child.
(c)   Unless otherwise established in this article or
via proceedings to adjudicate parentage, the parents named
on a child's birth certificate are established to be the
parents of a child.
14-2-802.        Standing to maintain proceeding.
(a)   Subject       to    article    5     of    this    act       and   W.S.
14-2-807 and 14-2-809, a proceeding to adjudicate parentage
may be maintained by:
(ii)       The A mother or father of the child;
14-2-803.        Parties to proceeding.
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                            17LSO-0315
(a)   The       following    individuals            shall    be    joined   as
parties in a proceeding to adjudicate parentage:
(i)       The A mother or father of the child; and
14-2-816.        Temporary order.
(a)   In    a    proceeding       under      this    article,       the   court
shall issue a temporary order for support of a child if the
order   is   appropriate          and    the     individual        ordered    to   pay
support is:
(vi)       The A mother of the child.
14-2-822.        Order adjudicating parentage.
(a)   The       court   shall      issue      an     order        adjudicating
whether a man person alleged or claiming to be the father
parent is the parent of the child.
14-2-823.        Binding         effect       of      determination          of
parentage.
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING           17LSO-0315
(c)    In a proceeding to dissolve a marriage, the court
is deemed to have made an adjudication of the parentage of
a child if the court acts under circumstances that satisfy
the jurisdictional requirements of W.S. 20-4-142, and the
final order:
(i)    Expressly identifies a child as a "child of
the marriage," "issue of the marriage," or similar words
indicating that the husband is the father parties are the
parents of the child; or
(ii)   Provides for support of the child by the
husband one parent to the other unless paternity parentage
is specifically disclaimed in the order.
(g)    The court shall appoint an attorney to represent
the best interests of a child if the court finds that the
best interests of the child is not adequately represented.
In cases concerning an adjudication of paternity parentage
pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, the court shall
appoint an attorney to represent the best interests of the
child.       In determining the best interests of the child, the
court shall consider the following factors:
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                          17LSO-0315
(ii)     The     length      of      time     during       which       the
adjudicated       father     parent      has   assumed         the    role    of    the
father parent of the child;
(iv)     The nature of the relationship between the
child and the adjudicated father parent;
(vi)     The harm that may result to the child if
adjudicated paternity parentage is successfully disproved;
(vii)        The nature of the relationship between the
child and any alleged father parent;
(ix)     Other factors that may affect the equities
arising      from     the         disruption      of      the        father        child
parent-child        relationship         between       the      child        and    the
adjudicated       father     or    the   chance     of    other       harm    to    the
child.
(m)   If     the    court     finds     that      the    adjudication         of
paternity parentage should be vacated, in accordance with
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                17LSO-0315
all of the conditions prescribed, the court shall enter an
order which provides all of the following:
(vii)    That the adjudicated father parent has no
right to reimbursement of past child support paid to the
mother another parent, the state of Wyoming or any other
assignee of child support.
14-2-903.     Paternity    of        child   of      assisted
reproduction.
A   man   who   provides sperm for, or       consents   to, assisted
reproduction by a woman as provided in W.S. 14-2-904, with
the intent to be the parent of her the child, is the parent
of the resulting child.
14-2-904.     Consent to assisted reproduction.
(a)   Consent by a woman and a man person who intends
to be the parent of a child born to the woman by assisted
reproduction shall be in a record signed by the woman and
the man intended parent. This requirement shall not apply
to a donor.
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                   17LSO-0315
(b)   Failure to sign a consent required by subsection
(a) of this section, before or after birth of the child,
does not preclude a finding of paternity parentage if the
woman and the man intended parent, during the first two (2)
years     of   the    child's      life    resided   together   in the same
household with the child and openly held out the child as
their own.
14-2-905.        Limitation       on     spouse's      dispute   of
parentage.
(a)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of
this section, the husband spouse of a wife who gives birth
to   a    child      by    means   of     assisted   reproduction   may   not
challenge his paternity the parentage of the child unless:
(i)    Within two (2) years after learning of the
birth of the child he the spouse commences a proceeding to
adjudicate his paternity the parentage; and
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                       17LSO-0315
(ii)    The court finds that he the spouse did not
consent to the assisted reproduction, before or after birth
of the child.
(b)    A   proceeding    to     adjudicate      paternity      parentage
may be maintained at any time if the court determines that:
(i)     The husband did not provide sperm for, or
the wife did not provide the egg for, or before or after
the birth of the child consent to, assisted reproduction by
his wife the spouse or a surrogate;
(ii)    The    husband    and    the    mother   of     the   child
spouses      have    not    cohabited    since       the   probable    time   of
assisted reproduction; and
(iii)    The husband spouse never openly held out
the child as his that spouse's own.
14-3-210.      Admissibility       of     evidence       constituting
privileged communications.
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                            17LSO-0315
(a)   Evidence     regarding     a    child      in       any    judicial
proceeding resulting from a report made pursuant to W.S.
14-3-201     through    14-3-215     shall   not   be    excluded         on   the
ground it constitutes a privileged communication:
(i)   Between husband and wife spouses;
14-3-402.      Definitions.
(a)   As used in this act:
(xiii)    "Parent"      means     either        a    natural       or
adoptive parent of the child, a person adjudged the parent
of the child in judicial proceedings man presumed to be the
father under W.S. 14-2-504 or a person established as the
parent under title 14, chapter 2, article 5;
14-6-201.      Definitions;     short    title;           statement     of
purpose and interpretation.
(a)   As used in this act:
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                17LSO-0315
(xvii)    "Parent"      means    either   a   natural   or
adoptive parent of the child, a person adjudged the parent
of the child in judicial proceedings man presumed to be the
father under W.S. 14-2-504 or a person established as the
parent under title 14, chapter 2, article 5;
14-6-402.      Definitions.
(a)   As used in this act:
(xiv)     "Parent"     means    either    a   natural   or
adoptive parent of the child, a person adjudged the parent
of the child in judicial proceedings man presumed to be the
father under W.S. 14-2-504 or a person established as the
parent under title 14, chapter 2, article 5;
15-5-206.      Death     benefits     to   dependent    parents;
amounts.
If any paid fireman dies, leaving no surviving spouse or
children, but leaves a one (1) or both surviving dependent
father or mother or both parents, the board shall pay to
the mother if there is no father, to the father if there is
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                        17LSO-0315
no mother or to both surviving dependent parent, out of the
firemen's pension account, a monthly amount equal to the
pension the retired fireman was receiving if retired at the
time of his death, or if in active service at the time of
death, a monthly amount equal to the greater of the monthly
benefit payable to the fireman under W.S. 15-2-204 at the
time of his death or the monthly benefit payable under W.S.
15-2-204(a) for twenty (20) years of active service. If
either of the surviving mother or father parents dies after
the    payments      have   started,     the    board     shall     pay    to   the
remaining      surviving      parent     the    full    amount      as    computed
under this section.
15-5-309.      Death        benefits;      surviving         spouse      and
children; amounts; length of payments; benefit adjustment.
(b)    If the police officer is retired and drawing his
a   pension     at    the   time    of   his    the    officer's     death,     and
leaves    a    wife    surviving      spouse,    the     board    shall      pay   a
monthly pension out of the fund to his the surviving spouse
equal to two-thirds (2/3) of the pension the retired police
officer       was    receiving      at   the    time     of   his    death.        In
addition, the board shall pay to the surviving spouse or
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                            17LSO-0315
legal guardian sixty dollars ($60.00) per month out of the
fund for the support and maintenance of each child of the
deceased, retired officer who is under eighteen (18) years
of age and was supported by him the officer prior to his
the officer's death. The payments shall continue until the
child becomes eighteen (18) years of age or marries.
15-5-312.       Application for benefits; statement filed;
determination; review.
If     any    policeman       police     officer,           his     the     officer's
surviving       wife   spouse,        dependent          children    or     dependent
parents are entitled to any pension or benefits under this
article, the policeman police officer, or in the event of
his    the    officer's     death      the    dependent,          shall   apply    for
benefits      or    pension      by   filing        a    complete     and    concise
statement of facts necessary to entitle the applicant to
the benefits or pension. The application shall be filed
with    the    board    upon     forms       it    provides.        The   board    may
investigate each application and determine whether benefits
or    pension      should   be    granted.         The    board     may   also    hear
evidence as to the justice of the application, or require
and receive affidavits as to the truth of the statements
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                              17LSO-0315
made therein. If the application is refused, the matter may
be reviewed by the district court of the county in which
the applicant resides pursuant to Rule 12 of the Wyoming
Rules of Appellate Procedure.
18-5-303.       Exemptions from provisions.
(a)    Unless the method of sale or other disposition is
adopted for the purpose of evading the provisions of this
article,      this    article         shall     not      apply     to    the   following
subdivisions        of land          however,      the    following       subdivisions
are subject to requirements which may be adopted by the
board    of   county commissioners regarding documentation                             of
the     proper       use       and    implementation             of     the    following
exemptions:
(x)     A    division      which        that    is      created     by   the
acquisition      of       an   interest       in   land      in    the    name    of   the
husband and wife spouses or other persons in joint tenancy
or as tenants in common, and the interest shall be deemed
for purposes of this subsection as only one (1) interest;
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                             17LSO-0315
19-14-102.       Employment;             preference             in        public
departments or public works; qualifications and residence.
(a)    In every public department and upon all public
works in Wyoming, members of the United States military
establishment in any war or conflict as defined in section
101,    title    38,    United       States     Code,      honorably        discharged
from service, and the widows of members during widowhood
surviving       spouses        who      have    not       remarried,        shall     be
preferred       for    appointment        or    employment.        Age      or     other
physical impairment which that does not in fact materially
incapacitate          shall    not      disqualify        them    from       receiving
preference        if     they        possess        the    business          capacity,
competency, education or other qualifications for discharge
of     the    duties     required.        If    the       disabilities        do     not
materially interfere with performance of the duties, the
disabled      veterans        or   widows      surviving        spouses      shall    be
given    preference over             employment of         able-bodied veterans
and widows surviving spouses. A veteran or widow surviving
spouse who has not been a resident of the state of Wyoming
for a period of one (1) year or more immediately preceding
date    for     appointment        or    employment        is    not   entitled      to
preference under this section and for municipal or county
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                      17LSO-0315
employment,    no     preference   shall    be       granted   unless   the
applicant     under    this   section      is    a     resident   of    the
municipality or county in which employment is sought.
CHAPTER 1
MARRIED PERSONS
20-1-101.    Marriage a civil contract.
Marriage is a civil contract between a male and a female
person two (2) persons to which the consent of the parties
capable of contracting is essential.
20-1-102.    Minimum    marriageable            age;     exception;
parental consent.
(c)   When either party is a minor, no license shall be
granted without the verbal consent, if present, and written
consent, if absent, of the a father, mother, guardian or
person having the care and control of the minor. Written
consent shall be proved by the testimony of at least one
(1) competent witness.
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                          17LSO-0315
20-1-106.         Who     may      solemnize          marriage;      form     of
ceremony.
(b)    In   the     solemnization          of marriage        no    particular
form is required, except that the parties shall solemnly
declare      in    the    presence        of    the    person       performing      the
ceremony and at least two (2) attending witnesses that they
take each other as husband and wife spouses.
20-1-201.         Separate        estate       of     real    and     personal
property; not subject to control of spouse; exceptions.
All property belonging to a married person as his separate
property which he that the person owns at the time of his
marriage      or    which       that     during       marriage      he    the   person
acquires     in    good        faith     from   any        person   by    descent    or
otherwise, together with all rents, issues, increase and
profits thereof, is during marriage his that person's sole
and separate property under his the person's sole control
and may be held, owned, possessed and enjoyed by him the
person the same as though he the person were single. Such
property      is    not        subject    to     the       disposal,      control    or
interference of his the person's spouse and is exempt from
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                    17LSO-0315
execution or attachment for the debts of his the person's
spouse if the property was not conveyed to him by his the
person's spouse in fraud of his either person's creditors.
The necessary expenses of the family and the education of
the    children     are   chargeable        upon   the   property     of    both
husband and wife spouses, or either of them, for which they
may be sued jointly or separately.
20-2-101.     Void     and     voidable       marriages        defined;
annulments.
(d)    An action to annul a marriage on the ground that
one    of    the   parties   was    under    the   age   of   legal    consent
provided by W.S. 20-1-102(a) may be filed by the parent or
guardian entitled to the custody of the minor. The marriage
may not be annulled on the application of a party who was
of the age of legal consent at the time of the marriage nor
when it appears that the parties, after they had attained
the age of consent, had freely cohabited as man and wife
spouses.
(e)    An action to annul a marriage on the grounds of
mental       incompetency    may    be      commenced    on   behalf       of   a
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                               17LSO-0315
mentally incompetent person by his the person's guardian or
next   friend.     A    mentally        incompetent             person    restored   to
competency   may       maintain        an    action        of    annulment,    but   no
decree may be granted if the parties freely cohabited as
husband and wife spouses after restoration of competency.
20-2-102.       Petition by spouse for support.
When the husband and wife spouses are living separately, or
when they are living together but one (1) spouse does not
support    the     other     spouse          or        children    within     his    the
spouse's means, and no proceeding for divorce is pending,
the other spouse or the department of family services may
institute a proceeding for support. No less than five (5)
days    after      notice         is        personally           served     upon     the
nonsupporting spouse, the court may hear the petition and
grant such order concerning the support of the spouse or
children as it might grant were it based on a proceeding
for    divorce.        If   the        nonsupporting            spouse     cannot    be
personally served within this state but has property within
the jurisdiction of the court, or debts owing to him the
nonsupporting spouse, the court may order such constructive
service as appears sufficient and proper and may cause an
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                         17LSO-0315
attachment of the property. Upon completion of constructive
service the court may grant relief as if personal service
was had.
20-3-103.      Ordering of payments for support in lieu of
penalty; violation of order; trial; sentence; forfeiture of
recognizance; disposition of sum recovered.
If   the    court     finds    at    any    time    during      the    period    of
probation       the   defendant      has    violated      the    terms    of    the
order,     it   may   forthwith       proceed      with   the    trial    of    the
defendant under the original charge, or sentence him or her
or enforce a suspended sentence under the original plea or
conviction. In case of the forfeiture of recognizance, or
enforcement thereof by execution, the sum recovered may be
paid in whole or in part to the wife nondeserting spouse or
to the guardian, custodian or trustee of the minor child or
children.
20-3-104.      Proving       marriage,      parenthood;        spouses    as
witnesses;       disclosure         of     confidential         communications;
desertion, neglect or refusal to support.
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                    17LSO-0315
No other or greater evidence is required to prove the a
marriage of a husband and wife or that the defendant is the
father or mother of a child or children than is required to
prove such facts in a civil action. In a prosecution under
this    act       no    statute    or    rule     of   law   prohibiting    the
disclosure of confidential communications between husband
and wife spouses shall apply. Both husband and wife spouses
are competent witnesses to testify against each other to
any relevant matters including the fact of marriage and the
parentage of the child or children but neither shall be
compelled         to    give      evidence      incriminating     himself    or
herself. Proof of the desertion of the wife other spouse,
child        or        children     in       destitute       or   necessitous
circumstances, or of the neglect or refusal to provide for
the support and maintenance of the wife other spouse, child
or children is prima facie evidence that the desertion,
neglect or refusal is willful.
20-4-166.         Special rules of evidence and procedure.
(j)    The defense of immunity based on the a marital
relationship of husband and wife or a parent and -child
relationship does not apply in a proceeding under this act.
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                  17LSO-0315
20-4-170.      Establishment of support order.
(b)    The tribunal may issue a temporary child support
order    if    the    tribunal      determines     that   the   order    is
appropriate and the individual ordered to pay is:
(vii)    The A mother of the child; or
20-5-410.      Hearing and order.
(d)    A privilege against disclosure of communications
between spouses and a defense of immunity based on the a
marital relationship of husband and wife or a parent and –
child relationship may not be invoked in a proceeding under
this article.
34-1-109.      Right    to   convey   all     interest    in     land
divested from spouse; effect of conveyance.
In all cases where the interest of the husband one (1)
spouse in any tract or parcel of land has been, or shall
be, divested by process of law, or by voluntary conveyance
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                             17LSO-0315
or otherwise, the wife other spouse may, by her separate
deed,    release   and     convey       to    the      purchaser,       his   the
purchaser's     heirs    or   grantees,         all      her    that    spouse's
interest   in   such     tract    or    parcel      of    land,    whether    in
possession or expectancy, in the same manner as though she
that spouse were sole and unmarried.; and a Any deed by the
wife that spouse so executed and acknowledged, shall be a
valid and sufficient bar in law and equity to any right or
choice of dower, or other interest which she that spouse
may thereafter assert in such premises.
34-1-110.   Married persons; conveyance by nonresident.
When any married woman person, not residing in this state,
shall    join   her     husband     the       person's         spouse    in   any
conveyance of real estate situated within this state, the
conveyance shall have the same effect as if she the person
were sole, and the acknowledgment of proof of the execution
of such conveyance by her, may be the same as if she the
person were sole.
34-1-129.   Spouses        may        appoint      each      other     as
attorney-in-fact to control interests.
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                          17LSO-0315
A husband or wife spouse may constitute the other spouse as
his or her attorney-in-fact to control or dispose of his or
her property, or any inchoate or other interest therein and
may revoke the same to the same extent and in the same
manner as other persons.
34-1-142.        Instrument    transferring           title      to   real
property; procedure; exceptions; confidentiality.
(c)   This section does not apply to:
(v)    A transfer between husband and wife spouses
or     parent    and     child   with      only        nominal    consideration
therefor;
34-2-121.        Conveyance   and       encumbrance       of    homesteads
void unless spouse joins; exception.
Every    owner     or    occupant    of    a    homestead        as   established
herein may voluntarily sell, mortgage, or otherwise dispose
of or encumber the same; provided the instrument of writing
conveying,      mortgaging,      disposing        of    or   encumbering     such
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                  17LSO-0315
homestead shall contain in substance the following words:
"Hereby      releasing   and   waiving    all   rights   under     and   by
virtue of the homestead exemption laws of this state", and
shall be freely and voluntarily signed and acknowledged by
the owner and the spouse of the owner of said homestead.
The foregoing provisions shall not be applicable to nor
shall     compliance     therewith   be    required   for   full    legal
effectiveness of any conveyance of property directly from
husband to wife one spouse to the other.
35-1-410.      Birth registration.
(c)    When a birth occurs outside an institution, the
certificate shall be prepared and filed by one (1) of the
following in the indicated order of priority:
(iii)    The father, the mother Either parent, or
in the absence of the father and the or inability of the
mother both parents, the person in charge of the premises
where the birth occurred.
35-1-411.      Name of parents on birth certificate.
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                   17LSO-0315
(a)   If the mother was married either at the time of
conception or birth of child, or between conception and
birth, the name of the husband spouse shall be entered on
the certificate as the father other parent of the child,
unless:
(ii)    The husband other parent signs an affidavit
denying that he or she is the father parent and the mother
and the person to be named as the father other parent sign
an   affidavit      of    paternity    parentage    under    this    section.
Affidavits    may        be   joint   or   individual   or   a   combination
thereof,     and         each     signature     shall   be       individually
notarized. The name of the person signing the affidavit of
paternity parentage shall be entered as the father other
parent on the certificate of birth.
(b)   If the mother was not married either at the time
of conception or birth of child, or between conception and
birth, the name of the father other parent shall not be
entered on the certificate of birth without an affidavit of
paternity parentage signed by the mother and the person to
be named as father the other parent, unless a determination
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                    17LSO-0315
of the paternity parentage has been made by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(c)    In any case in which paternity parentage of a
child is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the name of the father parents and surname of the child
shall be entered on the certificate of birth in accordance
with the finding and order of the court.
(d)    If the father other parent is not named on the
certificate of birth, no other information about the father
other parent shall be entered on the certificate.
35-1-422.     Marriage registration.
(a)    A record of each marriage performed in the state
shall be filed with the state registrar of vital records as
provided      in   this   section.   The   officer      who   issues    the
marriage license shall prepare the certificate on the form
furnished by the state registrar of vital records upon the
basis    of   information     obtained     from   the    parties   to    be
married, as provided by W.S. 20-1-103 and signed by the
bride and groom parties to be married.
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                 17LSO-0315
37-9-504.      Contracts restricting liability void.
Any contract, rule, or regulation or device whatsoever, the
purpose or intent of which shall be to enable any such
person or corporation, so operating such railroad to exempt
itself from any liability created by this act shall, to
that extent, be void. Nor shall any contract of insurance,
relief, benefit or indemnity in case of injury or death,
entered into prior to the injury, between the person so
injured and such corporation, or any person or association
acting for such corporation, nor shall the acceptance of
any such insurance, relief, benefit, or indemnity by the
person injured, his widow the person's surviving spouse,
heirs, or legal representatives after the injury, from such
corporation, person or association, constitute any bar or
defense to any cause of action brought under the provisions
of     this   act,    but   nothing    herein    contained   shall    be
construed     to     prevent   or   invalidate   any   settlement    for
damages between the employer and the employees subsequent
to injuries received.
40-14-349.      Use of multiple agreements.
HB0212
STATE OF WYOMING                             17LSO-0315
With respect to a supervised loan, no lender may permit any
person, or husband and wife spouses, to become obligated in
any way under more than one (1) loan agreement with the
lender or with a person related to the lender, with intent
to obtain a higher rate of loan finance charge than would
otherwise be permitted by the provisions on loan finance
charge for supervised loans (W.S. 40-14-348) or to avoid
disclosure of an annual percentage rate pursuant to the
laws    relating    to    disclosure        and      advertising.       The    excess
amount of loan finance charge provided for in agreements in
violation    of    this    section     is       an    excess        charge   for   the
purposes    of     the    provisions       on     effect       of    violations     on
rights of parties (W.S. 40-14-521) and the provisions on
civil actions by administrator (W.S. 40-14-613).
Section     2.    This   act    is    effective         immediately         upon
completion of all acts necessary for a bill to become law
as     provided    by    Article      4,    Section        8    of     the    Wyoming
Constitution.
(END)
HB0212