ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




AN   ACT   relating    to   insurance;     modifying    reserve
requirements    for    specified     insurers;     establishing
exemptions; creating additional related requirements for
insurers;    providing    confidentiality      for    specified
documents; requiring use of certain mortality tables under
specified conditions; defining the nonforfeiture interest
rate   for    specified    insurance    policies;     providing
definitions; providing rulemaking authority; and providing
for an effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Wyoming:


     Section 1.   W.S. 26-6-209 through 26-6-213 are created
to read:

     26-6-209. Valuation     manual   for   policies    and
contracts; amendments to manual; rules on minimum valuation
standards; actuarial examinations.

     (a) For policies or contracts issued on or after the
operative date of the valuation manual, the standard
prescribed in the valuation manual is the minimum standard
of valuation required under W.S. 26-6-202(e), except as
provided under subsection (e) or (g) of this section.

     (b) The operative    date   of   the   valuation   manual   is
January 1, 2017.

     (c) Unless an amendment in the valuation manual
specifies a later effective date, amendments to the
valuation manual shall be effective on January 1 following
the date when all of the following have occurred:




                                 1
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




          (i) The change to the valuation manual has been
adopted by the NAIC by an affirmative vote representing:

               (A) At least three-fourths (3/4) of the
members of the NAIC voting, but not less than a majority of
the total membership; and

               (B) Members    of   the   NAIC   representing
jurisdictions totaling greater than seventy-five percent
(75%) of the direct premiums written as reported in the
following annual statements most recently available prior
to the vote in subparagraph (A) of this paragraph:

                    (I)     Life,    accident     and   health   annual
statements;

                    (II)    Health annual statements; or

                    (III)     Fraternal annual statements.

     (d) The   valuation    manual       shall   specify   all   of   the
following:

          (i) Minimum     valuation   standards    for and
definitions of the policies or contracts subject to W.S.
26-6-202(e). The minimum valuation standards shall be:

               (A) The commissioner's reserve valuation
method for life insurance contracts, other than annuity
contracts, subject to W.S. 26-6-202(e);

              (B) The commissioner's reserve valuation
method for annuity contracts subject to W.S. 26-6-202(e);
and



                                     2
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




               (C) Minimum reserves for all other policies
or contracts subject to W.S. 26-6-202(e).

          (ii) Which    policies  or   contracts  or    types
thereof are subject to the requirements of a principle
based valuation under W.S. 26-6-210(a) and the minimum
valuation standards consistent with those requirements;

          (iii) For policies and contracts subject        to   a
principle based valuation under W.S. 26-6-210:

              (A) Requirements for the format of reports
to the commissioner under W.S. 26-6-210(b)(iii), which
shall include information necessary to determine if the
valuation is appropriate and in compliance with this
article;

               (B) Assumptions for risks over which        the
insurer does not have significant control or influence;

               (C) Procedures for corporate governance and
actuarial function oversight and a process for appropriate
waiver or modification of the procedures.

          (iv) For policies and contracts not subject to a
principle based valuation under W.S. 26-6-210, the minimum
valuation standard shall either:

              (A) Be consistent with the minimum standard
of valuation prior to the operative date of the valuation
manual; or

               (B) Require   reserves  that   quantify  the
benefits, guarantees, funding and risks associated with the
policies or contracts at a level of conservatism that


                                3
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




reflects conditions including unfavorable     events   with   a
reasonable probability of occurring.

          (v) The experience data required under W.S.
26-6-211   including reporting and any   data analysis
requirements; and

          (vi) Any    other   requirement   including   those
relating to reserve methods, models for measuring risk,
generation of economic scenarios, assumptions, margins, use
of   company  experience,   risk   measurement,   disclosure,
certifications, reports, actuarial opinions and memoranda,
transition rules and internal controls.

     (e) In    the   absence   of  a   specific   valuation
requirement or if a specific valuation requirement in the
valuation manual is not in the commissioner's opinion in
compliance with this article, the insurer shall comply with
minimum valuation standards prescribed by the commissioner
by rule or regulation.

     (f) The commissioner may, at the expense of the
insurer, engage, employ or contract a qualified actuary to
perform an actuarial examination of the insurer and opine
on the appropriateness of any reserve assumption or method
used by the insurer, or to review and opine on an insurer's
compliance with any requirement set forth in this article.
The commissioner may rely upon the opinion of a qualified
actuary engaged by the commissioner of another state,
district or territory of the United States regarding
provisions contained within this article.

     (g) The commissioner may require an insurer to change
any assumption or method that in the commissioner's opinion
is necessary to comply with the requirements of the


                                4
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

          ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

          SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                      2017 GENERAL SESSION




valuation manual or this article. An insurer shall adjust
the   reserves  as   required  by   the   commissioner.  The
commissioner   may  take   other   disciplinary   action  as
permitted pursuant to W.S. 26-1-107.

    26-6-210.     Principle based valuation; requirements.

     (a) An insurer shall establish reserves using a
principle based valuation that meets all of the following
conditions for policies or contracts issued on or after the
operative date of the valuation manual as specified in the
valuation manual:

          (i) Quantifies the benefits, guarantees, funding
and risks associated with the policies or contracts at a
level of conservatism that reflects conditions including
unfavorable events    with a    reasonable   probability of
occurring during the lifetime of the contracts. For
policies or contracts with significant tail risk, reflects
conditions appropriately adverse to quantify the tail risk;

          (ii) Incorporates    assumptions,  risk   analysis
methods and financial models and management techniques that
are consistent with those utilized within the insurer's
overall   risk   assessment   process,   while   recognizing
potential differences in financial reporting structures and
any prescribed assumptions or methods;

          (iii) Incorporates     assumptions   derived    in   one
(1) of the following manners:

                 (A)   Assumptions prescribed in the valuation
manual;




                                  5
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




               (B) For assumptions not prescribed in the
valuation manual, assumptions that:

                   (I) Use    the    insurer's   available
experience, to the extent it is relevant and statistically
credible; or

                   (II) To the extent that company data
on experience is not available, relevant or statistically
credible,   use other  relevant,  statistically  credible
experience.

          (iv) Provides margins for uncertainty including
adverse deviation and estimation error such that the
greater the uncertainty the greater the margin and
resulting reserve.

     (b) An insurer using a principle based valuation for
one (1) or more policies or contracts subject to this
section as specified in the valuation manual shall:

           (i) Establish    procedures   for    corporate
governance   and  oversight  of the actuarial valuation
function consistent with those described in the valuation
manual;

          (ii) Provide   to   the   commissioner  and   the
insurer's board of directors an annual certification of the
effectiveness of the internal controls with respect to the
principle based valuation. The controls shall be designed
to assure all material risks inherent in the liabilities
and associated assets subject to the valuation are included
in the valuation and valuations are made in accordance with
the valuation manual. The certification shall be based on



                               6
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




the controls in     place   as   of   the   end   of   the    preceding
calendar year;

           (iii) Develop, and file with the commissioner
upon   the   commissioner's  request,  a   principle  based
valuation report that complies with standards prescribed in
the valuation manual.

     (c) A principle     based   valuation         may       include    a
prescribed formulaic reserve component.

     26-6-211.    Experience data reporting for policies and
contracts.

An insurer shall submit mortality, morbidity, policyholder
behavior or expense experience and other data as prescribed
in the valuation manual.

     26-6-212.    Confidential    information;     when      disclosure
is permitted.

     (a) Privilege     for,    and    confidentiality                  of,
confidential information is as follows:

          (i) Except    as   otherwise   provided   in   this
section,   an   insurer's    confidential    information   is
confidential and privileged and shall not be subject to
public inspection, subpoena, discovery or be admissible in
evidence in any private civil action. The commissioner may
use   an   insurer's   confidential    information   in   the
furtherance of any regulatory or legal action brought
against the insurer as part of the commissioner's official
duties;




                                      7
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




          (ii) Neither the commissioner nor any person who
receives confidential information while acting under the
authority of the commissioner shall be permitted or
required to testify in any private civil action concerning
an insurer's confidential information;

           (iii) In order to assist in the performance of
the commissioner's duties, and provided that a recipient
agrees, and has the legal authority to agree to maintain
the confidentiality and privileged status of documents,
materials, data and other information in the same manner
and to the same extent as required for the commissioner,
the commissioner may share confidential information with
other state, federal and international regulatory agencies
or law enforcement officials, with the NAIC and its
affiliates    and  subsidiaries  and,   in   the  case   of
confidential information specified in paragraphs (c)(i) and
(iv) of this section only, with the actuarial board for
counseling and discipline or its successor upon request
stating that the confidential information is required for
the purpose of professional disciplinary proceedings and
with state, federal and international law enforcement
officials;

          (iv) The commissioner may receive documents,
materials, data and other information, including otherwise
confidential and privileged documents, materials, data or
information,  from   the  NAIC   and  its   affiliates  and
subsidiaries, regulatory or law enforcement officials of
other foreign or domestic jurisdictions and the actuarial
board for counseling and discipline or its successor. The
commissioner shall maintain as confidential or privileged
any document, material, data or other information received
with notice or the understanding that it is confidential or



                               8
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




privileged under the laws of the jurisdiction that is the
source of the document, material or other information;

          (v) The commissioner may enter into agreements
governing the sharing and use of information consistent
with the provisions of this subsection;

          (vi) No waiver of any applicable privilege or
claim of confidentiality in the confidential information
shall occur as a result of disclosure to the commissioner
under this section or as a result of sharing as authorized
under paragraph (iii) of this subsection;

          (vii) A privilege established under the law of
any state or jurisdiction that is substantially similar to
the privilege established under this subsection shall be
available and enforced in any proceeding of this state;

          (viii) As used in this section "regulatory
agency," "law enforcement agency" and the "NAIC" include
their employees, agents, consultants and contractors.

     (b) Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section,
any confidential information specified in paragraphs (c)(i)
and (iv) of this section:

          (i) May be subject to subpoena for the purpose
of defending an action seeking damages from the appointed
actuary submitting the related memorandum in support of an
opinion submitted under W.S. 26-6-208 or principle based
valuation report developed under W.S. 26-6-210(b)(iii) by
reason of an action required by this article or by rule or
regulation promulgated in accordance with this article;




                               9
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




          (ii) May    otherwise    be    released by the
commissioner with the written consent of the insurer the
confidential information relates to; and

          (iii) Once any portion of a memorandum in
support of an opinion submitted under W.S. 26-6-208 or a
principle based valuation report developed under W.S.
26-6-210(b)(iii) is cited by the insurer in its marketing
or is publicly volunteered to or before a governmental
agency other than a state insurance department or is
released by the insurer to the news media, all portions of
the memorandum or report shall no longer be privileged or
confidential.

     (c) For purposes    of   this   section,   "confidential
information" means:

          (i) A memorandum in support of an opinion
submitted under W.S. 26-6-208 and any other documents,
materials and other information including all working
papers, and copies thereof, created, produced or obtained
by or disclosed to the commissioner or any other person in
connection with the memorandum;

          (ii) Except   as   otherwise  provided   in  this
paragraph, all documents, materials, digital or electronic
documents and other information including all working
papers, and copies thereof, created, produced or obtained
by or disclosed to the commissioner or any other person in
the course of an examination made under W.S. 26-6-209(f).
If an examination report or other material prepared in
connection with an examination made under W.S. 26-2-116 is
not held as private and confidential information under W.S.
26-2-116, an examination report or other material prepared
in   connection  with  an   examination  made   under  W.S.


                               10
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




26-6-209(f) shall not be confidential information to the
same extent as if the examination report or other material
had been prepared under W.S. 26-2-116;

          (iii) Any    reports, documents, materials    and
other information developed by an insurer in support of, or
in connection with, an annual certification by the insurer
under W.S. 26-6-210(b)(ii) and any reports, documents,
materials, digital or electronic documents and other
information including all working papers, and copies
thereof, created, produced or obtained by or disclosed to
the commissioner or any other person in connection with the
reports, documents, materials and other information;

          (iv) Any    principle   based  valuation   report
developed   under W.S.   26-6-210(b)(iii) and any     other
documents, materials, digital or electronic documents and
other information including all working papers, and copies
thereof, created, produced or obtained by or disclosed to
the commissioner or any other person in connection with the
report; and

          (v) Any experience data submitted by an insurer
under W.S. 26-6-211 and any reports, documents, materials,
data, digital or electronic documents and other information
including all working papers, and copies thereof, created
or produced in connection with the experience data that
include any potentially insurer identifying or personally
identifiable information, that is provided to or obtained
by the commissioner. This includes any reports, documents,
materials, data, digital or electronic documents and other
information including all working papers, and copies
thereof, created, produced or obtained by or disclosed to
the commissioner or any other person in connection with the
experience data or any other report, document, material,


                              11
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




datum, digital or electronic documents or other information
referred to in this paragraph.

     26-6-213.    Single state exemption.

     (a) The commissioner may exempt specific product
forms or product lines of a domestic insurer that is
licensed and doing business only in Wyoming from the
requirements of W.S. 26-6-209, provided that:

          (i) The commissioner has issued an exemption in
writing to the insurer and has not subsequently revoked the
exemption in writing; and

          (ii) The    insurer    computes   reserves    using
assumptions and methods used prior to the operative date of
the valuation manual in addition to any requirements
established by rule and regulation of the commissioner.

     (b) For any insurer granted an exemption under this
section, W.S. 26-6-203 and 26-6-205 through 26-6-208 shall
be applicable. With respect to any insurer applying the
exemption granted under this section, any reference to W.S.
26-6-209 found in W.S. 26-6-203 and 26-6-205 through
26-6-208 shall not be applicable.

     Section 2. W.S. 26-6-201, 26-6-202(a), (c), (d) and
by creating a new subsection (e), 26-6-203(a)(intro),
26-6-205(b)(intro), (i)(intro), (ii)(intro), (c)(i) and
(f), 26-6-206(a)(intro), (ii)(intro), (b)(i)(A) through (C)
and (v)(A), 26-6-207, 26-6-208 by creating new subsections
(g) and (h), 26-16-201 by creating a new subsection (c) and
26-16-209(j)(vi), by creating a new paragraph (vii), by
amending and renumbering (vii) as (viii), by creating a new
paragraph (ix) and (k) are amended to read:


                                 12
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

         ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

         SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                     2017 GENERAL SESSION




       26-6-201.    Short title; definitions.

       (a)   This article is known as the Standard Valuation
Law.

     (b) For the purposes of this article the following
definitions shall apply on or after the operative date of
the valuation manual. To the extent a definition which
follows is inconsistent or different from a definition
elsewhere in this code, the definition in this section
shall be applicable for the purposes of this article:

          (i) "Accident   and   health  insurance"  means
contracts that incorporate morbidity risk and provide
protection against economic loss resulting from accident,
sickness or medical conditions and as may be specified in
the valuation manual;

          (ii) "Appointed  actuary"   means  a  qualified
actuary who is appointed in accordance with the valuation
manual to prepare the actuarial opinion required in W.S.
26-6-208(h);

          (iii) "Deposit type contract" means contracts
that do not incorporate mortality or morbidity risks and as
may be specified in the valuation manual;

             (iv)   "Insurer" means an entity which:

                (A) Has written, issued or reinsured life
insurance    contracts, accident   and  health   insurance
contracts or deposit type contracts in this state and has
at least one (1) of the contracts or policies in force or
on claim; or


                                   13
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




               (B) Has written, issued or reinsured life
insurance   contracts,   accident and   health  insurance
contracts or deposit type contracts in any state and is
required to hold a certificate of authority to write life
insurance, accident and health insurance or deposit type
contracts in this state.

          (v) "Life   insurance" means  contracts that
incorporate mortality risk, including annuity and pure
endowment contracts, and as may be specified in the
valuation manual;

          (vi) "Policyholder behavior" means any action a
policyholder, contract holder or any other person with the
right to elect options, such as a certificate holder, may
take under a policy or contract subject to this article
including lapse, withdrawal, transfer, deposit, premium
payment,    loan,   annuitization   or   benefit   elections
prescribed by the policy or contract but excluding events
of   mortality   or  morbidity   that  result   in  benefits
prescribed in their essential aspects by the terms of the
policy or contract;

          (vii) "Principle   based   valuation"  means   a
reserve valuation that uses one (1) or more methods or one
(1) or more assumptions determined by the insurer and that
complies with W.S. 26-6-210 as specified in the valuation
manual;

           (viii) Except as provided in W.S. 26-6-208(g),
"qualified actuary" means an individual who is qualified to
sign the applicable statement of actuarial opinion in
accordance    with  the    American   Academy of   Actuaries
qualification    standards    for   actuaries  signing   the


                               14
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




statements and who meets the requirements specified in the
valuation manual;

           (ix) "Tail risk" means a risk that occurs where
the frequency of low probability events is higher than
expected under a normal probability distribution or where
there are observed events of very significant size or
magnitude;

          (x) "Valuation manual" means the manual of
valuation instructions adopted by the NAIC as specified in
this article and as subsequently amended.

     26-6-202. Annual valuation of reserves       required;
minimum standard valuation; other valuations      accepted;
conditions.

     (a) Policies and contracts issued prior to the
operative date of the valuation manual shall be governed by
the following provisions:

          (i) The commissioner, annually, shall value, or
cause to be valued, the reserve liabilities (or reserves)
for all outstanding life insurance policies and annuity and
pure endowment contracts of any authorized life insurer and
may certify the amount of those reserves, specifying the
mortality tables, interest rates and methods used in
calculating the reserves issued prior to the operative date
of the valuation manual. The commissioner may use group
methods and approximate averages for fractions of a year or
otherwise in calculating reserves. In the case of an alien
insurer, the valuation is limited to its United States
business;.




                              15
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




          (ii) Instead   of  the  valuation   of  reserves
required of any foreign or alien insurer, the commissioner
may accept any valuation from the insurance supervisory
official of any state or other jurisdiction if that
valuation complies with the minimum standard provided in
this article;

          (iii) The commissioner may accept the valuation
made by any domestic life insurer upon satisfactory proof
of its correctness and compliance with W.S. 26-6-208;

          (iv) The provisions set forth in W.S. 26-6-203
and 26-6-205 through 26-6-207 shall apply to all policies
and contracts, as appropriate, subject to this article
prior to the operative date of the valuation manual and the
provisions set forth in W.S. 26-6-209 and 26-6-210 shall
not apply to the policies and contracts.

     (c) Any    insurer  which   adopts   any  standard of
valuation producing greater aggregate reserves than those
calculated according to the minimum standard provided in
this article, with the commissioner's approval, may adopt
any lower standard of valuation, but not lower than the
minimum standard. For the purposes of this section, the
holding of additional reserves previously determined by a
qualified the appointed actuary to be necessary to render
the opinion required by W.S. 26-6-208 shall not be deemed
to be the adoption of a higher standard of valuation.

     (d) Reserves for any category of policies, contracts
or benefits as the commissioner establishes, may at the
insurer's option, be calculated according to any standards
which produce greater aggregate reserves for the category
than those calculated according to the minimum standard
provided in this article. However, the rates of interest


                              16
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




used for policies and contracts other than annuity and pure
endowment contracts shall not be higher greater than the
corresponding rates of interest used in calculating any
nonforfeiture benefits provided in      the policies and
contracts.

     (e) Policies and contracts issued on or after the
operative date of the valuation manual shall be governed by
the following provisions:

          (i) The commissioner shall annually value, or
cause to be valued, the reserve liabilities (or reserves)
for all outstanding life insurance contracts, annuity and
pure endowment contracts, accident and health contracts,
and deposit type contracts of any authorized life insurer
issued on or after the operative date of the valuation
manual. In the case of an alien insurer, the valuation is
limited to its United States business;

          (ii) Instead   of  the  valuation   of  reserves
required of any foreign or alien insurer, the commissioner
may accept any valuation from the insurance supervisory
official of any state or other jurisdiction if that
valuation complies with the minimum standard provided in
this article;

          (iii) The commissioner may accept the valuation
made by any domestic life insurer upon satisfactory proof
of its correctness and compliance with W.S. 26-6-208;

         (iv) The provisions set forth in W.S. 26-6-209
and 26-6-210 shall apply to all policies and contracts
issued on or after the operative date of the valuation
manual.



                              17
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




     26-6-203. Reserve calculation; valuation net premium
exceeding gross premium charged.

     (a) If in any contract year the gross premium charged
by any life insurer on any policy or contract is less than
the valuation net premium for the policy or contract
calculated by the method used in calculating the reserve
thereon but using the minimum valuation standards of
mortality and rate of interest, the minimum reserve for the
policy or contract shall be the greater of either the
reserve calculated according to:

     26-6-205. Computation of minimum standard; reserve
valuation method, life insurance and endowment benefits;
annuity and pure endowment benefits; minimum reserves;
reserve calculation; indeterminate plans.

     (b) Except as otherwise provided in W.S. 26-6-206 and
26-6-207 the minimum standard for the valuation of all
policies and contracts subject to this article issued prior
to the effective date of the standard valuation law shall
be that provided by the laws in effect immediately prior to
that date. Except as otherwise provided in W.S. 26-6-206
and 26-6-207 the minimum standard for the valuation of all
policies and contracts subject to this article issued on or
after the effective date of the standard valuation law and
prior to the operative date of the valuation manual shall
be the commissioners' reserve valuation method defined in
subsections (c) and (e) of this section, W.S. 26-6-203 and
26-6-207, three and one-half percent (3 1/2%) interest or
four percent (4%) interest for life insurance policies and
contracts other than annuity and pure endowment contracts
issued on or after July 1, 1975 and prior to May 20, 1981,
five and one-half percent (5 1/2%) interest for single
premium life insurance policies, and four and one-half


                              18
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




percent (4 1/2%) interest for all other such policies
issued on or after May 20, 1981, and the following tables:

          (i) For all ordinary policies of life insurance
issued on the standard basis, excluding any disability and
accidental death benefits in those policies:

          (ii) For all industrial life insurance policies
issued on the standard basis, excluding any disability and
accidental death benefits in those policies:

     (c) Except as provided in W.S. 26-6-203, 26-6-207 and
subsection (e) of this section reserves according to the
commissioners' reserve valuation method:

          (i) For    the  life   insurance   and  endowment
benefits of policies providing for a uniform amount of
insurance and requiring the payment of uniform premiums,
shall be the excess, if any, of the present value, at the
date of valuation, of the future guaranteed benefits
provided by those policies, over the then present value of
any future modified net policy premiums. The modified net
premiums for any such policy shall be a uniform percentage
of the contract premiums for the benefits such that the
present value, at the date of issue of the policy, of all
the modified net premiums shall be equal to the sum of the
then present value of the benefits provided by the policy
and the excess of (1) over (2) as follows: (1) A net level
annual premium equal to the present value, at the date of
issue, of the benefits provided after the first policy
year, divided by the present value at the date of issue, of
an annuity of one (1) per annum payable on each policy
anniversary on which a premium falls due. The net level
annual premium shall not exceed the net level annual
premium on the nineteen (19) year premium whole life plan


                              19
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




for insurance of the same amount at an age one (1) year
higher than the age at issue of the policy; (2) A net one
(1) year term premium for benefits provided in the first
policy year;

     (f) No insurer's aggregate reserves for all life
insurance policies, excluding disability and accidental
death benefits, shall be less than the aggregate reserves
calculated in accordance with the method set forth in
subsections (b), (c), (d), (e) and (h) of this section and
W.S. 26-6-203, and the mortality tables and rates of
interest used in calculating nonforfeiture benefits for
those policies. In no event shall the aggregate reserves
for all policies, contracts and benefits be less than the
aggregate reserves determined by the qualified appointed
actuary to be necessary to render the opinion required by
W.S. 26-6-208.

     26-6-206. Computation  of   minimum  standard  for
annuities; computation of minimum standard valuation by
calendar year of issue.

     (a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this
section the minimum standard for the of valuation of all
for individual annuity and pure endowment contracts issued
on or after the operative date of this section as defined
in subsection (b) of this section, and for all annuities
and pure endowments purchased on or after that operative
date under group annuity and pure endowment contracts,
shall be the commissioners' reserve valuation method
defined in W.S. 26-6-205(c), (d) and (e) and the following
tables and interest rates:

             (ii)   For   all   annuities   and   pure   endowments
purchased:


                                    20
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




     (b)(i) The interest rates used      in   determining   the
minimum standard for the valuation of:

               (A) All Life insurance policies issued in a
particular calendar year, on or after the operative date of
W.S. 26-16-209;

               (B) All    Individual   annuity   and   pure
endowment contracts issued in a particular calendar year on
or after January 1, 1995;

               (C) All   Annuities   and   pure  endowments
purchased in a particular calendar year on or after January
1, 1995, under group annuity and pure endowment contracts;
and

          (v) The reference interest rate referred to in
paragraphs (ii) and (iii) of this subsection shall be
defined as follows:

               (A) For all life insurance, the lesser of
the average over a period of thirty-six (36) months and the
average over a period of twelve (12) months, ending on June
30 of the calendar year next preceding the year of issue,
of the monthly average of the composite yield on seasoned
corporate bonds, as published by Moody's Investors Service,
Inc.;

     26-6-207. Minimum standards for accident and health
insurance contracts including disability plans.

The commissioner shall promulgate regulations containing
the minimum standards applicable to the valuation of
accident and health contracts, including disability plans,


                               21
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




issued prior to the operative date of the valuation manual.
For accident and health insurance contracts issued on or
after the operative date of the valuation manual, the
standard prescribed in the valuation manual is the minimum
standard of valuation required under W.S. 26-6-202(e).

    26-6-208.     Actuarial opinion of reserves.

     (g) Actuarial opinions issued prior to the operative
date of the valuation manual shall be governed by the
following provisions:

          (i) Every life insurer doing business in this
state shall annually submit the opinion of a qualified
actuary as to whether the reserves and related actuarial
items held in support of the policies and contracts
specified by the commissioner by regulation are computed
appropriately, are based on assumptions which satisfy
contractual provisions, are consistent with prior reported
amounts and comply with applicable laws of this state. The
commissioner by regulation shall define the specifics of
this opinion and add any other items deemed to be necessary
to its scope;

          (ii) Every life insurer, except as exempted by
regulation, shall also annually include in the opinion
required by paragraph (i) of this subsection, an opinion of
the same qualified actuary as to whether the reserves and
related actuarial items held in support of the policies and
contracts specified by the commissioner by regulation, when
considered in light of the assets held by the insurer with
respect to the reserves and related actuarial items,
including the investment earnings on the assets and the
considerations anticipated to be received and retained
under the policies and contracts, make adequate provision


                                 22
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




for the insurer's obligations under the policies and
contracts   including the benefits   under   and expenses
associated    with   the   policies and   contracts.  The
commissioner may provide by regulation for a transition
period for establishing any higher reserves which the
qualified actuary deems necessary in order to render the
opinion required by this section;

          (iii) Each opinion required by paragraph (ii) of
this subsection shall be governed by the following
provisions:

               (A) A memorandum, in form and substance
acceptable to the commissioner as specified by regulation,
shall be prepared to support each actuarial opinion;

                (B) If the insurer fails to provide a
supporting memorandum at the request of the commissioner
within a period specified by regulation or the commissioner
determines that the supporting memorandum provided by the
insurer   fails   to  meet  the  standards   prescribed  by
regulation or is unacceptable to the commissioner, the
commissioner may engage a qualified actuary at the expense
of the insurer to review the opinion and the basis for the
opinion and prepare any supporting memorandum required by
the commissioner.

          (iv) Every opinion required by this subsection
shall be governed by the following provisions:

               (A) The opinion shall be submitted with the
annual statement reflecting the valuation of reserve
liabilities for each year ending on or after December 31,
1995;



                              23
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




               (B) The opinion shall apply to all business
in force including individual and group health insurance
plans, in form and substance acceptable to the commissioner
as specified by regulation;

               (C) The opinion shall be based on standards
adopted by the actuarial standards board and on additional
standards as the commissioner by regulation prescribes;

               (D) In the case of an opinion required to
be   submitted  by  a   foreign   or  alien   insurer,  the
commissioner may accept the opinion filed by that insurer
with the insurance supervisory official of another state if
the commissioner determines that the opinion reasonably
meets the requirements applicable to an insurer domiciled
in this state;

               (E) Except in cases of fraud, willful
misconduct or negligence the qualified actuary shall not be
liable for damages to any person, other than the insurer
and the commissioner, for any act, error, omission,
decision or conduct with respect to the actuary's opinion;

               (F) Disciplinary action by the commissioner
against the insurer or the qualified actuary shall be in
accordance with W.S. 26-1-107;

               (G) Any   memorandum   in  support   of  the
opinion, and any other material provided by the insurer to
the commissioner in connection with the opinion, shall be
kept confidential by the commissioner, may be shared as
authorized by and in accordance with the provisions of W.S.
26-2-113(d), and shall not be made public other than for
the purpose of defending an action seeking damages from any
person by reason of any action required by this section or


                              24
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




by regulations promulgated under this section. Once any
portion of the confidential memorandum is cited by the
insurer   in  its   marketing   or is   cited   before  any
governmental agency other than a state insurance department
or is released by the insurer to the news media, no portion
of the memorandum shall be confidential. The memorandum or
other   material   may   otherwise  be   released   by  the
commissioner:

                   (I)   With   the   written   consent   of   the
insurer; or

                    (II) To    the   American   Academy  of
Actuaries upon request stating that the memorandum or other
material is required for the purpose of professional
disciplinary proceedings and setting forth procedures
satisfactory   to the commissioner for preserving       the
confidentiality of the memorandum or other material.

          (v) For    the   purposes  of   this subsection,
"qualified actuary" means a member in good standing of the
American Academy of Actuaries and who meets requirements
prescribed by regulation of the commissioner.

     (h) Actuarial opinions of reserves issued after the
operative date of the valuation manual shall be governed by
the following provisions:

          (i) Every    insurer    with   outstanding   life
insurance   contracts,   accident   and  health   insurance
contracts or deposit type contracts in this state and
subject to regulation by the commissioner shall annually
submit the opinion of the appointed actuary as to whether
the reserves and related actuarial items held in support of
the policies and contracts are computed appropriately,


                                25
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




based on assumptions that satisfy contractual provisions,
consistent with prior reported amounts and comply with
applicable laws of this state;

          (ii) Every    insurer    with   outstanding   life
insurance   contracts,   accident   and   health   insurance
contracts or deposit type contracts in this state and
subject to regulation by the commissioner, except as
exempted in the valuation manual, shall also annually
include in the opinion required by paragraph (i) of this
subsection, an opinion of the same appointed actuary as to
whether the reserves and related actuarial items held in
support of the policies and contracts specified in the
valuation manual, when considered in light of the assets
held by the insurer with respect to the reserves and
related actuarial items including the investment earnings
on the assets and the considerations anticipated to be
received and retained under the policies and contracts,
make adequate provision for the insurer's obligations under
the policies and contracts including the benefits under and
expenses associated with the policies and contracts;

          (iii) Each opinion required by paragraph (ii) of
this subsection shall be governed by the following
provisions:

               (A) A memorandum, in form and substance as
specified in the valuation manual and acceptable to the
commissioner, shall be prepared to support each actuarial
opinion;

              (B) If the insurer fails to provide a
supporting memorandum at the request of the commissioner
within a period specified in the valuation manual or the
commissioner determines that the supporting memorandum


                               26
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




provided by the insurer fails to meet the standards
prescribed by the valuation manual or is otherwise
unacceptable to the commissioner, the commissioner may
engage a qualified actuary at the expense of the insurer to
review the opinion and the basis for the opinion and
prepare   the  supporting   memorandum   required  by   the
commissioner.

          (iv) Every opinion required by this subsection
shall be governed by the following provisions:

               (A) The opinion shall be in form           and
substance as specified in the valuation manual            and
acceptable to the commissioner;

               (B) The opinion shall be submitted with the
annual statement reflecting the valuation of such reserve
liabilities for each year ending on or after the operative
date of the valuation manual;

               (C) The opinion shall apply to all policies
and contracts subject to paragraph (ii) of this subsection,
plus other actuarial liabilities as may be specified in the
valuation manual;

               (D) The opinion shall be based on standards
adopted by the actuarial standards board or its successor,
and on any additional standards as may be prescribed in the
valuation manual;

               (E) In the case of an opinion required to
be   submitted  by  a   foreign   or  alien   insurer,  the
commissioner may accept the opinion filed by that insurer
with the insurance supervisory official of another state if
the commissioner determines that the opinion reasonably


                              27
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




meets the requirements applicable to an insurer domiciled
in this state;

               (F) Except in cases of fraud or willful
misconduct, the appointed actuary shall not be liable for
damages to any person, other than the insurer and the
commissioner, for any act, error, omission, decision or
conduct with respect to the appointed actuary's opinion;

               (G) Disciplinary action by the commissioner
against the insurer or the appointed actuary shall be in
accordance with W.S. 26-1-107.

     26-16-201. Short title; policy issue date; valuation
manual operative date.

     (c) For the purpose of this article, "operative date
of the valuation manual" means January 1, 2017.

     26-16-209. Section applicability; premium   adjustment
for any policy; annual calculation; exception.

     (j) All adjusted premiums and present values referred
to in this article shall be calculated for all policies of
ordinary insurance on the basis of the commissioners' 1980
standard ordinary mortality table or, at the election of
the company for any one (1) or more specified life
insurance plans, the commissioners' 1980 standard ordinary
mortality table with ten-year select mortality factors; for
all industrial insurance policies on the basis of the
commissioners' 1961 standard industrial mortality table;
and for all policies issued in a particular calendar year
on the basis of a rate of interest not exceeding the
nonforfeiture interest rate as defined in this section for
policies issued in that calendar year, except that:


                              28
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




           (vi) Any For policies issued prior to the
operative date of the valuation manual, any commissioners'
standard ordinary mortality tables the National Association
of Insurance Commissioners NAIC adopts after 1980, that are
approved by regulation the commissioner promulgates, for
use in determining the minimum nonforfeiture standard, may
be   substituted for the commissioners'      1980 standard
ordinary mortality table with or without ten-year select
mortality factors or for the commissioners' 1980 extended
term insurance table;

          (vii) For policies issued on or after the
operative date of the valuation manual, the valuation
manual shall provide the commissioners' standard mortality
table for use in determining the minimum nonforfeiture
standard that may be substituted for the commissioners'
1980 standard ordinary mortality table with or without
ten-year select mortality factors or for the commissioners'
1980 extended term insurance table. If the commissioner
approves by regulation any commissioners' standard ordinary
mortality table adopted by the NAIC for use in determining
the minimum nonforfeiture standard for policies issued on
or after the operative date of the valuation manual then
that minimum nonforfeiture standard supersedes the minimum
nonforfeiture standard provided by the valuation manual;

          (vii)(viii) For policies issued prior to the
operative date of the valuation manual, any commissioners'
standard   industrial     mortality   tables   the   National
Association of Insurance Commissioners NAIC adopts after
1980, that are approved by regulation the commissioner
promulgates,   for    use    in   determining   the   minimum
nonforfeiture   standard,    may   be  substituted  for   the
commissioners' 1961 standard industrial mortality table or


                                29
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




the commissioners' 1961 industrial extended term insurance
table;.

          (ix) For    policies   issued on or      after  the
operative date of the valuation manual, the valuation
manual shall provide the commissioners' standard mortality
table for use in determining the minimum nonforfeiture
standard that may be substituted for the commissioners'
1961   standard   industrial    mortality    table   or   the
commissioners' 1961 industrial extended term insurance
table. If the commissioner approves by regulation any
commissioners' standard industrial mortality table adopted
by   the   NAIC  for    use  in    determining   the  minimum
nonforfeiture standard for policies issued on or after the
operative date of the valuation manual then that minimum
nonforfeiture standard supersedes the minimum nonforfeiture
standard provided by the valuation manual.

     (k)   The   nonforfeiture   interest   rate   is   defined   as
follows:

          (i) For policies issued prior to the operative
date of the valuation manual, the nonforfeiture interest
rate per annum for any policy issued in a particular
calendar year is equal to one hundred twenty-five percent
(125%) of the calendar year statutory valuation interest
rate for such policy as defined in the standard valuation
law rounded to the nearer one-fourth percent (1/4%),.
provided the nonforfeiture interest rate shall not be less
than four percent (4%);

          (ii) For  policies  issued on or     after  the
operative date of the valuation manual, the nonforfeiture
interest rate per annum for any policy issued in a



                                  30
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0006

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 33, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




particular calendar year shall be provided by the valuation
manual.

     Section 3. W.S. 26-6-202(b) and 26-6-208(a) through
(f) are repealed.

     Section 4. This act is effective immediately upon
completion of all acts necessary for a bill to become law
as provided by Article 4, Section 8 of the Wyoming
Constitution.

                             (END)




Speaker of the House                  President of the Senate


                           Governor

                  TIME APPROVED: _________

                  DATE APPROVED: _________

I hereby certify that this act originated in the House.




Chief Clerk




                                 31
