ORIGINAL HOUSE                                      ENGROSSED
BILL NO. HB0030

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 12, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




AN   ACT   relating   to  state  parks,   historic  sites,
archeological sites and recreation areas; authorizing the
department of state parks and cultural resources to
designate parks, sites and areas as fee areas; modifying
fees for the use of parks, sites and areas; authorizing
voluntary fees; modifying provision related to the use of
fee income as specified; removing redundant language; and
providing for effective dates.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Wyoming:


     Section 1. W.S. 36-4-121(a)(intro), by creating new
paragraphs (xvii) through (xxvi), (b), (c), (h), (j), (k),
(o) and by creating new subsections (r) and (s) is amended
to read:

     36-4-121. Permits to    use   state   parks,   recreation
areas and historic sites.

     (a) The department of state parks and cultural
resources shall offer for sale permits that allow use of
the state parks, recreation areas, archeological sites and
historic sites. Daily use permits shall be required at
Glendo, Guernsey, Curt Gowdy, Edness Kimball Wilkins,
Buffalo Bill, Boysen, Seminoe and Keyhole state parks and
Fort Bridger, South Pass City, Trail End, Fort Fetterman
and Fort Phil Kearney state historic sites, and Hawk
Springs state recreation area. The department may establish
voluntary pay stations at Bear River and Hot Springs state
parks to allow users of those parks to make voluntary
contributions for the use of the state parks. Persons who
enter or use Bear River or Hot Springs state park without
paying daily use fees shall not be subject to the penalties
provided for in subsection (j) of this section. Overnight


                              1
ORIGINAL HOUSE                                       ENGROSSED
BILL NO. HB0030

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 12, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




camping permits shall be required at Boysen, Buffalo Bill,
Curt Gowdy, Glendo, Guernsey, Keyhole, Seminoe and Sinks
Canyon state parks, Connor Battlefield state historic site,
Medicine Lodge state archeological site and Hawk Springs
state recreation area by the department during the entire
calendar year as designated by the department with the
approval of the Wyoming parks and cultural resources
commission.    Permits may be subject to per person, per
vehicle or time restrictions or any other restriction the
director of the department deems appropriate. The director
may waive any permit fee imposed pursuant to this section,
offer discounts or offer at no charge complimentary permits
or gift certificates for permits authorized by this
section.    Except for the lifetime permit issued without
cost pursuant to as provided in subsection (n) of this
section, the cost of the permits authorized under this
section shall be approved by the commission and set in an
amount not to exceed the following:

          (xvii) Resident     annual   daily    use   permit
.................................................... $64.00

          (xviii) Nonresident annual     daily  use permit
.................................................... $96.00

          (xix)    Resident daily use fee...............$8.00

          (xx)    Nonresident daily use fee............$12.00

          (xxi)    Resident overnight camping permit..$12.00

          (xxii) Nonresident         overnight       camping
permit...............................................$18.00




                                  2
ORIGINAL HOUSE                                      ENGROSSED
BILL NO. HB0030

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 12, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




          (xxiii) Annual     resident   overnight    camping
permit...............................................$96.00

          (xxiv) Per person daily use bus fee for guided
tours, which shall not be charged to persons under the age
of eighteen (18) years................................$5.00

          (xxv)   Daily use lodge permit............$300.00

          (xxvi) Daily    use  group   picnic  shelter   and
adjacent ground permit..............................$150.00

     (b) Any holder of an annual daily use permit or an
annual resident     overnight camping permit may obtain
additional vehicle annual daily use permits or additional
vehicle   annual  overnight   camping   permits  from   The
department or any selling agent of the department may issue
additional vehicle annual daily use permits or additional
vehicle annual overnight camping permits upon payment of
the a fee prescribed under paragraph (a)(vii) or (viii) of
this section, as applicable, and upon submission of proof
satisfactory to the department that an original annual
permit was purchased and that the additional vehicle is
registered in the same name as the vehicle for which the
original annual permit is obtained, or that the additional
vehicle is operated by the person who purchased the
original annual permit or a member of his family under duly
granted authority from his employer. The director shall
determine the validity of the authority of an applicant to
operate an employer-owned vehicle prior to issuance of an
additional vehicle permit for that vehicle under this
section. Any vehicle in tow by another vehicle owned by the
same person shall be considered a single vehicle for
purposes of this section and only a single annual bucking
horse daily use permit shall be required for entrance at


                                3
ORIGINAL HOUSE                                    ENGROSSED
BILL NO. HB0030

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 12, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




state parks and a single annual overnight camping permit
shall be required for overnight camping at state parks in
an amount not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the cost of
the original annual permit.

     (c) If an annual daily use permit or an annual
resident overnight camping permit is lost, mutilated or
destroyed, the holder of the permit may obtain a duplicate
annual permit from The department or any selling agent of
the department permit may issue duplicate annual daily use
permits or annual resident overnight camping permits upon
the holder of the permit filing an affidavit showing the
loss, mutilation or destruction of the original permit and
upon payment of the a fee imposed under paragraph (a)(ix)
or (x) of this section, as applicable in an amount not to
exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the cost of the
original annual permit.

     (h) The funds received by the department from the
sale of the permits shall be deposited into an account
within the special revenue fund, hereby created as the
state parks account, and, except as otherwise provided by
this subsection, may be expended by the department for
capital construction projects, major maintenance, and site
interpretation such as exhibits, signage and displays as
approved by the legislature.     Interest on funds in the
account shall accrue to the account. Not more than
twenty-five percent (25%) thirty percent (30%) of the funds
in the account in any fiscal year may also be expended,
with legislative approval, for maintenance of outdoor
recreation areas and facilities provided that no amount
shall be expended for additional full-time employees or
increases in salaries or overtime pay for full-time
employees.



                               4
ORIGINAL HOUSE                                    ENGROSSED
BILL NO. HB0030

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 12, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




     (j) Any person using state parks, recreation areas,
archeological sites and historic sites and failing to
obtain a permit required authorized by this section and any
person otherwise violating this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), imprisonment for not more
than six (6) months, or both.

     (k) The department of state parks and cultural
resources is authorized to contract with the town of
Ranchester to implement a fee collection program at Connor
Battlefield state historic site and to provide for park
maintenance and operation. Notwithstanding subsection (h)
of this section, fees collected pursuant to paragraphs
(a)(ii) and (v) of this section for overnight camping at
Connor Battlefield state historic site shall be deposited
into a separate account and may be expended by the
department pursuant to contracts entered into under this
subsection.

     (o) The department is authorized to sponsor special
events and to contract with groups sponsoring special
events at state parks, recreation areas, archeological
sites or historic sites. A special event fee may be charged
as provided in paragraph (a)(xiii) of this section
regardless of whether a daily use fee has been established
by law and in addition to any other fee.         All funds
received from special events sponsored by the department
shall be deposited in special events account. The funds
deposited within the account are continuously appropriated
to and may be expended by the department to conduct special
events directly or pursuant to contracts entered under this
subsection.




                               5
ORIGINAL HOUSE                                        ENGROSSED
BILL NO. HB0030

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 12, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




     (r) The department may establish methods whereby
voluntary contributions may be accepted in support of state
parks, historic sites, archeological sites or recreation
areas.   The department may suggest and solicit specific
contribution amounts.

     (s) The department may, with the approval of the
commission, charge an amenities fee in addition to any
other fee authorized under this section for services
designated by the commission as added amenities.      Funds
collected from the amenities fee authorized by this
subsection shall be deposited in a separate account and are
continuously appropriated to the department to pay the
utility fees and maintenance costs for the additional
amenities offered.   The remaining funds collected from the
amenities fee authorized by this subsection at the end of
the fiscal year may be deposited in the state parks account
and expended in accordance with subsection (h) of this
section. Revenues and expenditures under this subsection
for each of the immediately preceding two (2) fiscal years
shall be reported within the department's biennial budget
request submitted under W.S. 9-2-1013.

     Section   2.   W.S.   36-4-121(a)(i)   through   (xv)   is
repealed.

     Section 3. The department shall promulgate rules and
regulations necessary to implement this act by July 1,
2017.




                                 6
ORIGINAL HOUSE                                         ENGROSSED
BILL NO. HB0030

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 12, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




     Section 4.

     (a) Except as provided in subsection        (b)    of   this
section, this act is effective July 1, 2017.

     (b) Section 3 of this act is effective immediately
upon completion of all acts necessary for a bill to become
law as provided by Article 4, Section 8 of the Wyoming
Constitution.

                             (END)




Speaker of the House                  President of the Senate


                           Governor

                  TIME APPROVED: _________

                  DATE APPROVED: _________

I hereby certify that this act originated in the House.




Chief Clerk




                                 7
