ORIGINAL SENATE                                    ENGROSSED
FILE NO. SF0044

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 44, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




AN ACT relating to speech pathology and audiology;
modifying requirements for licensure; modifying provisions
for suspension, revocation      and  renewal of licenses;
expanding list of persons eligible to serve on the board of
speech pathology and audiology; providing for a vice
chairman of the board; specifying functions of the board;
modifying   fees;  modifying   applicability  of  licensing
provisions; providing for and revising definitions; making
conforming amendments; removing obsolete language; and
providing for an effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Wyoming:

     Section 1. W.S. 33-33-101, 33-33-102(a)(i), (iii)
through (viii) and by creating new paragraphs (ix) and (x),
33-33-103(a) and (b), 33-33-104(a)(i) through (v) and by
creating a new paragraph (viii), 33-33-105, 33-33-201(a)
through (d), 33-33-202, 33-33-203(b), 33-33-303(c) and
(d)(iii), 33-33-304, 33-33-305(a)(intro), (iii), (iv), by
creating a new paragraph (v), (b) and by creating a new
subsection (e), 33-33-306(b) and by creating a new
subsection (d) and 33-33-307(a)(intro) are amended to read:

     33-33-101.   Short title.

This act is cited as the "License Practice Act for Speech
Speech-Language Pathologists and Audiologists".

     33-33-102.   Definitions.

     (a)   As used in this act:

          (i) "Board" means the state board of examiners
of speech speech-language pathology and audiology;



                                  1
ORIGINAL SENATE                                    ENGROSSED
FILE NO. SF0044

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 44, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION



          (iii) "Speech Speech-language pathologist" means
an individual who practices speech engages in the practice
of speech-language pathology;

          (iv) "Speech Speech-language pathology" means
the application of principles, methods and procedures for
the measurement, testing test administration, evaluation,
prediction, counseling, instruction, training, habilitation
or rehabilitation related to the delayed development of and
disorders of speech, voice or language communication,
literacy and swallowing including speech production and
fluency, language, cognition, voice, resonance and all
aspects of swallowing including related feeding behaviors
for the purpose of evaluating, preventing, ameliorating or
modifying   such   these   disorders  and   conditions   in
individuals or groups of individuals;

          (v) "Audiologist"    means   an   individual    who
practices engages in the practice of audiology;

          (vi) "Audiology"    means   the   application  of
principles, methods and procedures of measurement, testing
test administration, evaluation, prediction, consultation,
counseling, instruction, habilitation or rehabilitation
related to hearing and disorders of hearing the auditory
and vestibular system for the purpose of evaluating,
identifying, preventing, ameliorating or modifying such
disorders and conditions in individuals or groups of
individuals;. For the purposes of this subsection the words
"habilitation" and "rehabilitation" include, but are not
limited to hearing aid evaluation and recommendation;

          (vii) "Speech Speech-language pathology aide"
means an individual who meets minimum qualifications
established by the board rule for speech speech-language
pathology aides, which qualifications shall be less than


                                2
ORIGINAL SENATE                                    ENGROSSED
FILE NO. SF0044

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 44, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION



those established for license as a speech pathologist, and
who works under the direct supervision of a licensed speech
speech-language pathologist.; A speech-language pathology
aide may:

               (A) Assist   with  clerical   work,  client
escort, preparation of therapeutic materials and equipment
maintenance;

               (B) Provide bilingual interpretation and
translation   for   screening  and   assessment activities
exclusive of clinical interpretation; and

               (C) Assist   with other duties under the
direct   supervision   of    a   licensed speech-language
pathologist.

          (viii) "Audiology aide Audiometric technician"
means an individual who meets minimum qualifications
established by the board rule for audiology aides, which
qualifications shall be less than those established for
license as an audiologist, audiometric technicians and who
works   under  the  direct   supervision  of   a  licensed
audiologist;.

          (ix) "Speech-language pathology assistant" means
an individual who meets minimum qualifications established
by board rule for speech-language pathology assistants and
who   works    under  the   supervision  of   a   licensed
speech-language pathologist.   A speech-language pathology
assistant may:

               (A) Assist    with   speech,   language    and
hearing screenings without clinical interpretation;




                                3
ORIGINAL SENATE                                       ENGROSSED
FILE NO. SF0044

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 44, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION



               (B) Provide bilingual interpretation and
translation   for   screening  and    assessment activities
exclusive of clinical interpretation;

               (C) Follow documented treatment plans         or
protocols developed by the speech-language pathologist;

              (D)    Document client performance; and

               (E) Report information    to   the   supervising
speech-language pathologist.

          (x) "Telepractice"    means    the   practice  of
speech-language pathology or audiology by electronic or
other means by a speech-language pathologist or audiologist
in one (1) location to a patient in another location, with
or without an intervening health care provider.

    33-33-103.    Persons and practices affected.

     (a) License   shall  be    granted either in     speech
speech-language pathology or    audiology independently, or
both.

     (b) No person shall practice or represent himself as
a speech speech-language pathologist or audiologist unless
licensed pursuant to this act.

    33-33-104.    Persons and practices not affected.

    (a)   Nothing in this chapter prevents or restricts:

          (i) A physician or surgeon from engaging in the
practice of medicine in this state, or a person under the
supervision and control of a physician or surgeon from



                                 4
ORIGINAL SENATE                                     ENGROSSED
FILE NO. SF0044

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 44, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION



conducting hearing testing,   provided   the   person   is   not
called an audiologist;

          (ii) A hearing aid dealer or certified hearing
aid audiologist hearing aid specialist from engaging in the
practice of fitting, and selling dealing or dispensing of
hearing aids including testing of hearing for the purpose
of such fitting;

          (iii) A person who holds a valid and current
certificate as a speech or hearing specialist, issued by
the department of education professional teaching standards
board from performing speech speech-language pathology or
audiology services solely in the public schools or in
programs for the developmentally disabled funded by the
department of health.    However, the person may, without
obtaining a license under this act, consult with or
disseminate his research findings and other scientific
information to speech speech-language pathologists and
audiologists outside the jurisdiction of the organization
by which he is employed;

          (iv) The activities and services of a person
pursuing a course of study leading to a degree in speech
speech-language pathology at a college or university, if
such these activities and services constitute a part of a
supervised course of study and the person is designated
speech    speech-language     pathology  intern,    speech
speech-language pathology trainee student or other title
appropriate to his level of training;

          (v) The activities and services of a person
pursuing a course of study leading to a degree in audiology
at a college or university, if such activities and services
constitute a part of a supervised course of study and the
person is a designated audiology intern, audiology trainee


                               5
ORIGINAL SENATE                                         ENGROSSED
FILE NO. SF0044

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 44, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION



student or other       title   appropriate   to   his   level   of
training; or

          (viii) The   activities  of  any  other  person
licensed or certified permitted within the scope of their
profession.

    33-33-105.     Eligibility for licensing.

     (a) To be eligible for licensing by the board as a
speech speech-language pathologist or audiologist, a person
shall:

         (i)      Possess at least a:

               (A) Master's degree or its equivalent in
the area of speech speech-language pathology or audiology
from an educational institution recognized by the board;.
Effective July 1, 2012, all new applicants for audiology
licensing shall possess at least a or

              (B) Doctor of audiology degree or master's
degree in audiology or equivalent granted before July 1,
2012 from an educational institution recognized by the
board.;

          (ii) Submit    to the board evidence of the
completion of educational, clinical experience, examination
and employment requirements prescribed by the rules and
regulations adopted by the board; and

          (iii) Pass an examination approved by the board.
The board shall determine the subject and scope of the
examinations. Written examinations may be supplemented by
such oral examinations as the board shall determine may



                                   6
ORIGINAL SENATE                                   ENGROSSED
FILE NO. SF0044

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 44, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION



waive the examination requirement under this paragraph as
provided in W.S. 33-33-303 or rules of the board.

                         ARTICLE 2
    BOARD OF EXAMINERS OF SPEECH-LANGUAGE PATHOLOGY AND
                         AUDIOLOGY

    33-33-201.    Establishment.

     (a) There is established the board of examiners of
speech speech-language pathology and audiology.

     (b) The board shall be comprised of five (5) members
appointed by the governor. Board members shall have been
residents of this state for at least one (1) year
immediately preceding their appointment, and shall have
been engaged in rendering services to the public, teaching
or   research  in   speech   speech-language  pathology  or
audiology for at least five (5) years immediately preceding
their appointment. At least one (1) board member shall be
an audiologist, one (1) shall be a consumer, at least two
(2) shall be speech speech-language pathologists, and the
fifth member shall be a licensed physician, surgeon or
dentist health care professional licensed pursuant to title
33 of the Wyoming statutes. All board members except the
consumer and physician, surgeon or dentist licensed health
care professional shall at all times be holders of active
and valid licenses for the practice of speech pathology or
audiology and be in good standing as a speech-language
pathologist or audiologist in this state. The governor may
remove any board member as provided in W.S. 9-1-202.

     (c) The governor shall, within ninety (90) days
following enactment of this act, appoint two (2) board
members for a term of one (1) year; two (2) for a term of
two (2) years; and one (1) for a term of three (3) years.


                                   7
ORIGINAL SENATE                                      ENGROSSED
FILE NO. SF0044

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 44, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION



Appointments made thereafter shall be for three (3) year
terms, with no person being eligible to serve more than two
(2) full consecutive terms. Terms shall begin on the first
day of the calendar year and end on the last day of the
calendar year., except for the first appointed members, who
shall serve through the last calendar day of the year in
which they are appointed before commencing the terms
prescribed by this subsection.

     (d) The board shall meet during each calendar year to
select a chairman and vice chairman and for other business.
At least one (1) additional meeting shall be held before
the end of each calendar year. Further meetings may be
convened at the call of the chairman or the written request
of any three (3) board members.

     33-33-202.   Functions of the board.

     (a) The     board   shall   administer,   coordinate   and
enforce   the   provisions    of   this   act,   evaluate   the
qualifications and supervise the examinations of applicants
for license under this act. It may issue subpoenas, examine
witnesses,    administer    oaths,   and   shall    investigate
allegations of practices violating the provisions of this
act may administer oaths, take affidavits, summon witnesses
and take testimony as to matters coming within the scope of
its duties.

     (b) The board shall adopt rules and regulations
relating to professional conduct, which establish ethical
and professional standards of practice, and for other
purposes. The board may amend or repeal the same in
accordance with the Wyoming Administrative Procedure Act to
implement and enforce the provisions of this act.




                                 8
ORIGINAL SENATE                                     ENGROSSED
FILE NO. SF0044

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 44, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION



     (c) The board shall utilize an adopted seal to affix
to all licenses issued in accordance with this act and to
authenticate its proceedings.

    33-33-203.    Administrative provisions.

     (b) The board may adopt a seal by which it shall
authenticate its proceedings. Copies of the proceedings,
records and acts of the board, and certificates purporting
to relate the facts concerning such proceedings, records
and acts, signed by the chairman or the executive secretary
and authenticated by the board's seal, shall be prima facie
evidence in all courts of this state.

                         ARTICLE 3
 LICENSE OF SPEECH-LANGUAGE PATHOLOGISTS AND AUDIOLOGISTS

    33-33-303.    Waiver of examination or parts thereof.

     (c) The board may waive the examination and grant a
license to any person certified as clinically competent by
a    nationally    recognized   association   for   speech
speech-language and hearing in the area for which such
person is applying for license.

     (d) The board may issue a provisional license to
practice for twelve (12) months and renewal for one (1)
additional period of twelve (12) months, to an applicant
who has obtained clinical fellowship year status, subject
to the following:

           (iii) The applicant is seeking or has accepted
employment    in  Wyoming   as  a  speech  speech-language
pathologist or audiologist; and

    33-33-304.    Issuance of license.


                                 9
ORIGINAL SENATE                                       ENGROSSED
FILE NO. SF0044

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 44, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




The board shall issue a license to any person who meets the
requirements of this act and who pays to the board the
initial   application  and licensing   fee prescribed    in
authorized by W.S. 33-33-307.

    33-33-305.     Suspension and revocation of license.

     (a) The board may after an opportunity for hearing,
deny, refuse to issue or renew, a license, or may suspend
or revoke a license where the licensee or applicant for
license has been guilty of unprofessional conduct which has
endangered or is likely to endanger the health, welfare or
safety of the public. Such unprofessional conduct may
result from or impose probationary conditions upon a
licensee for any one (1) of the following:

          (iii) Being convicted of a felony in any court
of the United States A plea or verdict of guilty, or a
conviction following a plea of nolo contendere, made to a
criminal charge, if the acts for which he is convicted
committed are found by the board to have a direct bearing
on whether he should be entrusted to serve the public in
that particular capacity; or

         (iv)     Violating any provisions of this act;. or

          (v) Knowingly submitting      false   or   misleading
information to the board.

     (b) The    board   may,   after   hearing,  deny   an
application, or suspend, or revoke a license, or impose
probationary conditions upon a licensee. One (1) year from
the date of revocation of a license, an application may be
made to the board for reinstatement. The board may accept



                                 10
ORIGINAL SENATE                                   ENGROSSED
FILE NO. SF0044

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 44, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION



or reject an application for reinstatement and may require
an examination for such reinstatement.

     (e) In addition to any other remedies, the board may
assess part or all of the costs of the proceeding against a
disciplined licensee.

    33-33-306.    Renewal of license.

     (b) Every person licensed under this act shall
annually, on or before December 31, pay a license renewal
fee to the board. The board may, in the event payment of
the renewal fee is rendered after December 31 of any given
year, renew a license upon payment of the renewal of
license fee plus a late renewal fee prescribed by the
board.    No person who requests renewal of an expired
license shall be required to submit to examination as a
condition to renewal if renewal application is made within
two (2) years from the date of such expiration. Renewal
applications shall include proof that the applicant has
complied with any continuing education requirements, as
prescribed by rule and regulation of the board, accruing
during the time the license was expired.

     (d) Licensees who have allowed their licenses to
lapse by failing to renew in accordance with this section
may apply for relicensure pursuant to board rules and
regulations.   Upon   satisfying    the   requirements for
relicensure, the board shall issue a renewal of license to
practice speech language pathology or audiology

    33-33-307.    Fees.

     (a) The board shall may prescribe, and publish in a
manner it deems appropriate, application fees and fees for
examination,    licensing,     certification,    specialty


                                11
ORIGINAL SENATE                                      ENGROSSED
FILE NO. SF0044

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 44, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION



examination designation, renewal and other services in
amounts determined by the board. for the following
purposes:

     Section   2. W.S.     33-33-103(c),   33-33-104(a)(vi),
33-33-203(c),   33-33-301,   33-33-302,   33-33-305(c)   and
33-33-307(a)(i) through (v) and (b) are repealed.

     Section 3.   This act is effective July 1, 2017.

                             (END)




Speaker of the House                  President of the Senate


                           Governor

                  TIME APPROVED: _________

                  DATE APPROVED: _________

I hereby certify that this act originated in the Senate.




Chief Clerk




                                 12
