ORIGINAL SENATE                                       ENGROSSED
FILE NO. SF0088

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 81, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




AN ACT relating to public health and safety; creating the
advisory council on palliative care; providing definitions;
providing for council membership; providing duties for the
council; providing duties for the department of health or
other   entity  as  specified;   requesting  a  report   as
specified; providing a sunset date; and providing for an
effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Wyoming:

     Section 1.     W.S.   35-1-1201   through   35-1-1205   are
created to read:

                         ARTICLE 12
              PALLIATIVE CARE ADVISORY COUNCIL

     35-1-1201.    Definitions.

     (a)   As used in this article:

          (i) "Council" means the advisory council           on
palliative care established pursuant to this article;

          (ii) "Department"    means   the   department   of
health, unless the governor establishes the council within
a   different  office  or   department   pursuant  to   W.S.
35-1-1202, in which case department means the office or
department within which the governor establishes the
council;

           (iii)   "Palliative care" means:

                (A) Patient and family centered medical
care that    optimizes quality of life by anticipating,
preventing   and treating suffering  caused by  serious


                                  1
ORIGINAL SENATE                                      ENGROSSED
FILE NO. SF0088

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 81, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




illness. Palliative care throughout the continuum of
illness   involves  addressing  the   physical,    emotional,
spiritual and social needs of the patient and facilitates
patient   autonomy,  access  to  information    and choice.
Palliative care includes, but is not limited to, discussion
of the patient's goals for treatment and discussion of
appropriate treatment options including hospice care and
comprehensive pain and symptom management when appropriate;
and

               (B) Care    for   a   terminal,   potentially
terminal or serious chronic illness that is designed to
reduce adverse symptoms, reduce pain and suffering and
improve quality of life without, by itself, seeking to cure
the illness, prevent death or prolong life. Palliative care
includes hospice care.    Palliative care does not include
treatment or procedures that are meant to hasten death.

     35-1-1202.    Advisory council on palliative care.

     (a) There    is  created   the   advisory   council on
palliative care. For administrative purposes the council
shall be within the department of health unless otherwise
specified by the governor. The council shall consist of not
less than nine (9) nor more than thirteen (13) members
appointed by the governor. The governor shall appoint a
chairman for the council and may appoint a vice-chairman as
needed. Membership on the council shall include:

          (i) At least two (2) health care professionals
with professional experience in palliative or hospice care;

          (ii)    At least one (1) licensed pharmacist;




                                  2
ORIGINAL SENATE                                     ENGROSSED
FILE NO. SF0088

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 81, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




          (iii) At    least   one    (1)  law enforcement
professional with experience in illegal drug offenses or
the prosecution of illegal drug offenses;

          (iv) At least one (1) member with experience
counseling seriously ill or dying persons as a member of
the clergy or as a mental health professional;

          (v) At least one (1) member active in the faith
community in Wyoming;

          (vi) Other members selected by the governor to
reach a council size of at least nine (9) but not more than
thirteen (13) members, which may include members having
training,   experience  or  special   knowledge  concerning
personal caregiving or palliative care in a variety of
settings including home, community outpatient and inpatient
settings and with a variety of populations including adults
and children.

     (b) The initial appointments shall be for staggered
terms with three (3) members being appointed for two (2)
year terms, three (3) members being appointed for three (3)
year terms and the remaining members being appointed to one
(1) year terms. Thereafter, members shall be appointed for
three (3) year terms. The governor may remove any member of
the council as provided in W.S. 9-1-202.

     (c) Vacancies on the council     shall   be   filled   by
appointment for the unexpired term.

     (d) The council shall meet not less than two (2)
times a year at times and places mutually agreed upon
between the chairman of the council and the department.



                               3
ORIGINAL SENATE                                   ENGROSSED
FILE NO. SF0088

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 81, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




     (e) Members    of  the   council   shall  not  receive
compensation for their services. The governor may allow
council members to receive per diem and mileage in the same
manner and amount as members of the legislature, if the
governor determines sufficient funds are available.

     (f) Funding for expenses of the council shall come
from the budget of the department, unless the governor,
within his discretion as permitted by law, transfers funds
from a different budget.

    (g)   The council shall:

          (i) As its first priority, seek to maximize the
effectiveness of palliative care in Wyoming by making
comprehensive and accurate information and education about
palliative care available to the public, health care
providers and health care facilities;

          (ii) Consult with and advise the department of
health   on   matters    related   to   the  establishment,
maintenance,   operation    and   outcomes  evaluation   of
palliative care initiatives in Wyoming;

          (iii) Be available, as needed, to consult with
and advise the department of health on palliative care
needs   and initiatives    for  residents of institutions
operated by the department of health;

          (iv) Advise the governor and legislature on
policy and legislative needs to improve palliative care in
Wyoming;

          (v) Seek opportunities to open a dialogue with
law enforcement and regulatory bodies on how to accommodate


                               4
ORIGINAL SENATE                                         ENGROSSED
FILE NO. SF0088

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 81, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




the legitimate uses of prescription drugs for palliative
care with efforts to control the dangerous and illegal uses
of those drugs;

          (vi) When appropriate, advise the state board of
pharmacy, the attorney general, the division of criminal
investigation and local law enforcement on the needs of
palliative care patients for prescription drugs and how to
accommodate those needs consistent with efforts to control
the dangerous and illegal uses of those drugs; and

          (vii) Under no circumstances shall the scope of
this council be construed or expanded to advocate,
legitimize or otherwise provide for euthanasia or assisted
suicide.

     35-1-1203.    Department duties.

     (a)    The department shall:

          (i) Publish information and resources on its
website, including links to external resources, concerning:

                (A)   Palliative        care     providers    and
facilities;

              (B) Information   about   palliative  care
delivery in the home, community outpatient and inpatient
settings;

                (C)   Best   practices     for   palliative   care
delivery;

                (D)   Consumer education materials; and



                                    5
ORIGINAL SENATE                                           ENGROSSED
FILE NO. SF0088

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 81, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




               (E) Referral      information     for     palliative
care, including hospices.

          (ii) Develop and implement, as appropriate and
consistent with existing appropriations, other initiatives
regarding palliative care services and education;

          (iii) Consult with the council regarding             the
performance of its duties under this section.

    35-1-1204.    Optional report to legislature.

The department shall provide the legislature and the
legislature's joint labor, health and social services
interim committee with a report by July 1, 2022 on the
success or failure of the council. The report should
contain recommendations to abolish, continue or modify the
council and any other recommendations as are appropriate
concerning   further   palliative  care   initiatives.  The
department and council shall provide information necessary
for   the  preparation    of  this  report,   provided  the
information requested is reasonable, economical and not
otherwise protected by law. Concerned parties may either
collaborate for the preparation of the report or provide
their own reports. All reports received pursuant to this
section shall be treated as public documents by the joint
labor, health and social services interim committee and the
legislative service office.

    35-1-1205.    Sunset.

W.S. 35-1-1201    through   35-1-1204   are   repealed    effective
July 1, 2023.




                                  6
ORIGINAL SENATE                                      ENGROSSED
FILE NO. SF0088

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 81, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




     Section   2. W.S. 35-1-240(a) by     creating     a   new
paragraph (xxiii) is amended to read:

    35-1-240.     Powers and duties.

     (a) The department of health, through the state
health officer, or under his direction and supervision,
through the other employees of the department, shall have
and exercise the following powers and duties:

          (xxiii) If the duty is not assigned to another
entity pursuant to W.S. 35-1-1202, develop initiatives and
provide information to the public regarding palliative care
as provided in W.S. 35-1-1203.




                                  7
ORIGINAL SENATE                                      ENGROSSED
FILE NO. SF0088

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 81, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




     Section 3. This act is effective immediately upon
completion of all acts necessary for a bill to become law
as provided by Article 4, Section 8 of the Wyoming
Constitution.

                             (END)




Speaker of the House                  President of the Senate


                           Governor

                  TIME APPROVED: _________

                  DATE APPROVED: _________

I hereby certify that this act originated in the Senate.




Chief Clerk




                                 8
