ORIGINAL SENATE
FILE NO. SF0118

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 26, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




AN ACT relating to the food freedom act; authorizing sales
at retail spaces maintained where homemade food is
produced; requiring separation from any commercial food
establishment;   providing    rulemaking  authority;   and
providing for an effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Wyoming:

     Section        1. W.S.          11-49-103(d)         and
35-7-110(a)(xxxi)(A),   (B)   and   by    creating   a    new
subparagraph (C) are amended to read:

     11-49-103. Wyoming    Food   Freedom    Act;    purpose;
exemptions; assumption of risk.

     (d) Except for raw, unprocessed fruit and vegetables,
food shall not be sold or used in any commercial food
establishment unless the food has been labeled, licensed,
packaged, regulated or inspected as required by law.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the sale of homemade
food for home consumption from a retail space located at
the ranch, farm or home where the food is produced. A
retail space selling homemade food under this section shall
inform the end consumer that the homemade food has not been
inspected and shall display a sign indicating that the
homemade food has not been inspected. If the retail space
is   in  any   way  associated   with  a   commercial  food
establishment or offers for sale any inspected product, the
retail space selling homemade food shall comply with rules
adopted by the department of agriculture which shall
require:

          (i) That    the   retail   space   be   physically
separated from the commercial food establishment with a
separate door and separate cash register or point of sale;


                              1
ORIGINAL SENATE
FILE NO. SF0118

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 26, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




          (ii) That each separate space shall include
signs or other markings clearly indicating which spaces are
offering inspected items for sale and which spaces are
uninspected;

          (iii) Separation    of   coolers,   freezers    and
warehouse   or  other   storage   areas   to  prohibit    the
intermingling of inspected and uninspected products;

          (iv) Any other requirements specified by the
department of agriculture to ensure the sale of homemade
foods is made to an informed end consumer.

     35-7-110.    Definitions.

     (a)   As used in this act:

           (xxxi) "Commercial food establishment" means and
includes any place or any area of any establishment that is
a wholesale or retail business where foods, drugs, devices
and cosmetics are displayed for sale, manufactured,
processed,   packed,  held or stored.     "Commercial  food
establishment" shall not include:

                 (A)   Any farmers market; or

               (B) Any    producer   or  informed   consumer
engaged in transactions pursuant to W.S. 11-49-103;. or

               (C) Any retail space selling homemade food
that is separate from a commercial food establishment in
accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the
department pursuant to W.S. 11-49-103(d).



                                  2
ORIGINAL SENATE
FILE NO. SF0118

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 26, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




     Section 2.   This act is effective July 1, 2017.

                             (END)




Speaker of the House                  President of the Senate


                           Governor

                  TIME APPROVED: _________

                  DATE APPROVED: _________

I hereby certify that this act originated in the Senate.




Chief Clerk




                                 3
