17LSO-0031
AN     ACT   relating     to   alcoholic   beverages;    modifying
requirements on liquor licensees to demonstrate a business
or enterprise will be operational or open for business; and
providing for an effective date.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Wyoming:
Section 1.    W.S. 12-1-101(a)(xxi) and 12-4-103(a)(iv)
are amended to read:
12-1-101.    Definitions.
(a)   As used in this title:
SF0014
STATE OF WYOMING                         17LSO-0031
(xxi)      "Operational" means offering for sale on
an ongoing weekly basis to the general public alcoholic
liquor and malt beverages as authorized under a license or
permit issued under this title; for not less than three (3)
consecutive months during any calendar year;
12-4-103.       Restrictions          upon       license       or     permit
applicants and holders; license limitation per person.
(a)   A    license      or    permit       authorized     by   this   title
shall not be held by, issued or transferred to:
(iv)      Any licensee who fails to demonstrate that
his licensed alcoholic or malt beverage enterprise will be
operational       in   a     planned   but        not   physically     functional
building within two (2) years one (1) year after a license
or permit has been issued or transferred, or if holding a
license,     fails      to    open     his    business      in    a    functional
building within two (2) years one (1) year after license
issuance     or   transfer      and    remain       operational       thereafter.
Upon a showing of good cause by the licensee and for an
additional period of not to exceed one (1) year, the local
licensing authority may extend the time period in which the
SF0014
STATE OF WYOMING                      17LSO-0031
business    or    enterprise            of     the   licensee   is   required      to
become operational or open for business pursuant to this
paragraph.        Any license             or   permit in     violation of       this
paragraph    shall          not    be     renewed    by   the   local   licensing
authority and once the enterprise is operational or open
for business, no licensee shall be eligible to repeat the
grace periods made available by this paragraph without the
consent     of        the     local          licensing     authority      due     to
extraordinary circumstances. For purposes of this paragraph
"remain    operational"            means       operational   consecutively        for
twelve (12) months or for not less than three (3) months if
determined       by    the        local      licensing    authority     to   be    a
seasonal operation;
Section 2.       This act is effective July 1, 2017.
(END)
SF0014