ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0004

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 18, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




AN ACT relating to the nuclear regulatory agreement and
nuclear regulatory functions of the state developed under
the agreement; requiring the adoption of a fee structure;
permitting the assessment of fees as specified; clarifying
scope   of  agreement   and   materials  subject   to   state
regulation;   amending    definitions;   excluding    certain
laboratories from state regulation; clarifying reciprocity
of out of state licenses; amending requirements related to
financial assurance arrangements; authorizing the director
to impound materials as specified; making conforming
amendments; and providing for an effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Wyoming:

     Section 1.    W.S. 35-11-2005 is created to read:

     35-11-2005.    Fees.

     (a)    The department shall adopt a fee structure which
accounts    for the full cost of the program, including
positions    authorized by this article and other positions
assessed    to implement the program developed under this
article.

     (b) The department may assess fees for the regulation
of source material under article 4 of this chapter,
including but not limited to the review and processing of
mining permit applications.

     Section 2. W.S. 35-11-103(d)(v)(A), (E), (j)(i) and
(ii), 35-11-2001(a) through (c) and by creating a new
subsection (e), 35-11-2002(a) and (b) and 35-11-2003(a),
(d) through (f) are amended to read:

     35-11-103.    Definitions.


                                  1
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0004

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 18, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




     (d) Specific   definitions       applying   to   solid   waste
management:

          (v) "Commercial    radioactive  waste  management
facility" means any facility used or intended to be used to
receive for disposal, storage, reprocessing or treatment,
any amount of radioactive wastes which are generated by any
person other than the facility owner or operator, or which
are generated at a location other than the location of the
facility, but does not include:

               (A) Uranium     mill   tailings    facilities
licensed by the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission
which receive in situ leaching uranium mining by-product
byproduct materials or are specifically authorized by the
department on a limited basis to receive small quantities
of wastes defined in section 11e(2) 11e.(2) of the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954, (42 U.S.C. § 2014(e)(2),) as amended,
which were generated by persons other than the facility
owner or operator or which were generated at a location
other than the location of the facility, or both; and

               (E) Facilities   licensed   by  the   United
States nuclear regulatory commission whose sole purpose is
to receive in situ leaching uranium mining by-product
byproduct materials as defined in section 11(e)(2) 11e.(2)
of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, (42 U.S.C. § 2014(e)(2),)
as amended.

     (j) Specific    definitions   applying    to   nuclear
regulatory functions of the state as provided in article 20
of this chapter:




                                  2
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0004

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 18, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




          (i) "Byproduct material" means the tailings or
wastes produced by the extraction or concentration of
uranium and or thorium from any ore processed primarily for
its source material content as defined in section 11(e)(2)
11e.(2) of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 42 U.S.C. §
2014(e)(2), as amended;

          (ii) "Recovery or milling" means as defined in
10 C.F.R. part 40.4, as amended, to include any activity
that generates byproduct material as defined in section
11(e)(2) 11e.(2) of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 42
U.S.C. § 2014(e)(2), as amended;

     35-11-2001. Authorization to negotiate transfer of
certain nuclear regulatory functions to the state; scope of
regulated material.

     (a) The governor, on behalf of the state, is
authorized to contact the nuclear regulatory commission to
express the intent of the state of Wyoming to enter into an
agreement under section 274 of the Atomic Energy Act of
1954, 42 U.S.C. § 2021, as amended, with the nuclear
regulatory commission providing for the assumption by the
state of regulatory authority over source material from
involved in uranium or thorium recovery or milling and
byproduct material, included under as defined in section
274 11e.(2) of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 42 U.S.C. §
2021   2014(e)(2), as   amended. The nuclear     regulatory
commission shall maintain regulation regulatory authority
over all other source material, section 11e.(1), (3) and
(4) byproduct material and special nuclear material as
defined in the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 42 U.S.C. § 2014,
as amended, and the activities reserved under section 274
of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 42 U.S.C. § 2021, as
amended.


                               3
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0004

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 18, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




     (b) The department shall serve as the lead agency for
the regulation of source material from involved in uranium
or thorium recovery or milling and the associated byproduct
material. generated pursuant to the requirements of this
article in the state of Wyoming. The department is
authorized to enforce the requirements of the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, 42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq., as amended, under
the agreement reached between the state and the nuclear
regulatory commission as provided in section 274 of the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 42 U.S.C. § 2021, as amended.

     (c) The    governor,   through   the   department,  is
authorized to negotiate all aspects of a potential
agreement under this section between the state of Wyoming
and the nuclear regulatory commission.      The governor is
authorized to enter into a final agreement with the nuclear
regulatory commission for the regulation of source material
from involved in uranium or thorium recovery or milling and
the associated byproduct material. generated in the state
of Wyoming pursuant to the requirements of this article.

     (e) The categories of materials governed by this
article,   as   agreed   upon   by   the   nuclear  regulatory
commission and the state, are source material involved in
uranium or thorium recovery or milling and the associated
byproduct material, as defined in section 11e.(2) of the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 42 U.S.C. § 2014(e)(2), as
amended. This article does not govern independent or
commercial laboratory facilities that possess, use or
accept   byproduct     material.    The   nuclear   regulatory
commission    shall    retain    regulatory   authority   over
independent or commercial laboratory facilities.




                                 4
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0004

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 18, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




     35-11-2002. Authority    of       department    to   enforce
article; rulemaking.

     (a) Except as provided in this act, no person shall
acquire, own, possess, transfer, offer or receive for
transport or use any source material from involved in
uranium or thorium recovery or milling and the created
associated byproduct material without having been granted a
license therefore from the department or the nuclear
regulatory commission. The department is authorized to
regulate and penalize any unlicensed activities involving
source material from involved in uranium or thorium
recovery or milling and the created associated byproduct
material.

     (b) The   council,   upon  recommendation   from  the
director, is authorized to promulgate reasonable rules and
regulations necessary to effectuate the purpose of this
article.

     35-11-2003. Licensure;            license      requirements;
enforcement actions.

     (a) The director is authorized to issue licenses to
implement the requirements of the Atomic Energy Act of
1954, 42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq., as amended.       Licenses
issued under this section shall also authorize the
possession and use of source materials from involved in
uranium or thorium recovery or milling and the associated
byproduct material as provided in this article. The
director   is  further   authorized  to   enforce  license
provisions in accordance with this article. The department
shall recognize existing and effective licenses issued by
the nuclear regulatory commission. The department shall
also recognize licenses issued by other agreement states


                                   5
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0004

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 18, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




only for source material involved in uranium or thorium
recovery or milling or the associated byproduct material.

     (d) The    department   shall inspect   a  licensee's
operation to ensure compliance with license conditions, as
determined necessary by the administrator of the land
quality division to protect public health and safety. The
department shall also inspect proposed facilities and
proposed expansion of existing facilities to ensure that
unauthorized construction is not occurring. Licensees,
permittees and applicants for a license or permit shall
obtain and grant the department access to inspect their
mining operations facilities, source material involved in
uranium or thorium recovery or milling operations and the
associated byproduct material generated at such times and
frequencies as determined necessary by the department to
protect public health and safety.

     (e) When issuing a license for byproduct material
under this article, the director shall require licensees to
provide   an   approved  financial   assurance   arrangement
consistent with nuclear regulatory commission requirements
provided in 10 C.F.R. part 40, appendix A, criterion 9, as
amended. The arrangement shall contain sufficient funds to
cover the costs of decommissioning and, to the extent
applicable, long-term surveillance and maintenance for
conventional   source material milling and      heap   leach
facilities cost estimate and the payment of the charge for
decommissioning,   long   term  surveillance   and   control
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. part 40, appendix A.

     (f) The director is authorized to suspend licenses,
impound source material involved in uranium or thorium
recovery or milling and the associated byproduct material
and conduct enforcement actions in accordance with this


                               6
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0004

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 18, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




article, article 9      of this chapter      and   rules and
regulations promulgated under this act. The director is
authorized to suspend licenses and conduct enforcement
actions in accordance with department rules and regulations
and this article. In cases of an imminent threat to public
health and safety, the director is authorized to issue an
emergency order immediately suspending a license and any
associated activity as provided in W.S. 35-11-115. The
director is authorized to suspend or revoke a license for
repeated    or   continued    noncompliance    with    program
requirements pursuant to its rules and regulations and this
article. The director is also authorized to seek injunctive
relief   and   impose  civil   or   administrative    monetary
penalties as provided by law.

     Section 3. 2015 Wyoming     Session   Laws,   Chapter   60,
Section 2(c) is repealed.




                                 7
ORIGINAL HOUSE
BILL NO. HB0004

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 18, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                   2017 GENERAL SESSION




     Section 4. This act is effective immediately upon
completion of all acts necessary for a bill to become law
as provided by Article 4, Section 8 of the Wyoming
Constitution.

                             (END)




Speaker of the House                  President of the Senate


                           Governor

                  TIME APPROVED: _________

                  DATE APPROVED: _________

I hereby certify that this act originated in the House.




Chief Clerk




                                 8
