ORIGINAL SENATE
FILE NO. SF0021

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 13, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                    2018 BUDGET SESSION




AN ACT relating to adoption; requiring a report of adoption
to be filed with every petition to adopt a minor; requiring
reports be forwarded to the registrar of vital records;
making   conforming  amendments;  and   providing  for   an
effective date.

Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Wyoming:

     Section   1. W.S. 1-22-104(c) by  creating a                 new
paragraph (vi) and (d) and 35-1-416(a) through (c)                are
amended to read:

     1-22-104. Petition for adoption of minor; by whom
filed;   requisites,    confidential nature; inspection;
separate journal to be kept.

     (c) The following documents shall be filed with every
petition to adopt a child:

          (vi) A form prescribed and furnished by the
state registrar of vital records. The form shall be
completed to the extent possible with the information
required under W.S. 35-1-416(a) including:

               (A)   The    name       of   the   child   prior   to
adoption;

               (B)   Sex;

               (C)   Date of birth;

               (D)   Place of birth;

               (E)   Birth certificate number;



                                   1
ORIGINAL SENATE
FILE NO. SF0021

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 13, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                    2018 BUDGET SESSION




                (F)   Natural mother's full maiden name; and

                (G)   Natural father's full name.

     (d) The petition and documents filed pursuant to this
section, and the interlocutory decree, if entered, and the
final decree of adoption shall constitute a confidential
file and shall be available for inspection only to the
judge, or, by order of court, to the parties to the
proceedings or their attorneys, except as provided in W.S.
35-1-416. Upon the entry of the final decree of adoption,
all records in the proceedings shall be sealed and may be
available for inspection only by order of court for good
cause shown. The clerk of court shall maintain a separate
journal for adoption proceedings to be confidential and
available for inspection only by order of the court for
good cause shown. The court may order inspection of all or
part of the confidential file in adoption proceedings only
if it appears to the court that the welfare and best
interests of the child will be served by the inspection.

    35-1-416.     Court reports of adoption.

     (a) For each adoption of a child born in this state,
that is decreed by any court in this state, the court shall
require the preparation of a report of adoption on a form
prescribed and furnished by the state registrar of vital
records.    The report shall include such facts as are
necessary to locate and identify the certificate of birth
of the person adopted, provide information necessary to
establish new certificate of birth of the person adopted,
and shall identify the order of adoption and be certified
by the clerk of the court. The state registrar shall also
be furnished report of adoption as well as a certified copy



                                  2
ORIGINAL SENATE
FILE NO. SF0021

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 13, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                    2018 BUDGET SESSION




of adoption decree shall be furnished to the state
registrar as specified in subsection (c) of this section.

     (b) Whenever an adoption decree        is  amended or
annulled, the clerk of the court shall prepare a report
thereof which shall include such facts as are necessary to
identify the original adoption report and the facts amended
in the adoption decree as necessary to properly amend the
birth record.     The report of the amended or annulled
adoption decree shall be furnished to the state registrar
as specified in subsection (c) of this section.

     (c) Not later than the fifth day of each calendar
month the clerk of court shall forward to the state
registrar of vital records the report of adoption, records
of decrees of adoption, and any annulment or amendment
thereof entered in the preceding month together with such
related reports as the state registrar shall require.




                               3
ORIGINAL SENATE
FILE NO. SF0021

       ENROLLED ACT NO. 13, SENATE

       SIXTY-FOURTH LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING
                    2018 BUDGET SESSION




     Section 2.   This act is effective July 1, 2018.

                             (END)




Speaker of the House                  President of the Senate


                           Governor

                  TIME APPROVED: _________

                  DATE APPROVED: _________

I hereby certify that this act originated in the Senate.




Chief Clerk




                                 4
