18LSO-0400
A   JOINT    RESOLUTION       proposing      to        amend   the    Wyoming
constitution      to    specify     that   the     legislature       has   the
authority to determine the amount of public school funding;
requiring    the       legislature    to    take       into    consideration
currently available revenues and funding requirements when
funding the public schools; further defining the roles of
the legislature and judiciary in the creation and review of
the state's school finance system; and providing a ballot
statement.
BE IT RESOLVED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING,
two-thirds of all the members of the two houses, voting
separately, concurring therein:
Section   1.     The following      proposal      to amend Wyoming
Constitution,      Article     7,    Section       9     is    proposed    for
SJ0004
STATE OF WYOMING                           18LSO-0400
submission to the electors of the State of Wyoming at the
next general election for approval or rejection to become
valid    as    a    part    of    the     Constitution         if   ratified        by    a
majority of the electors at the election:
Article 7, Section 9              Taxation for schools.
(a)    The legislature shall make such further provision
by    taxation      or    otherwise,       as     the      legislature      rationally
determines necessary together with the income arising from
the    general      school       fund    will     to       create   and    maintain       a
thorough and efficient system of public schools, adequate
to    the    proper       instruction       of       all    youth   of     the    state,
between      the    ages    of    six     and     twenty-one        years,       free    of
charge;       and   in     view     of     such       provision       so    made,       the
legislature shall require that every child of sufficient
physical and mental ability shall attend a public school
during the period between six and eighteen years for a time
equivalent to three years, unless educated by other means.
In determining the amount of funding to provide for the
public        schools,       the         legislature          shall        take     into
consideration            currently       available           revenues      and      other
SJ0004
STATE OF WYOMING                       18LSO-0400
funding requirements that provide for the health, safety
and welfare of citizens of Wyoming.
(b)   It is the duty of the legislature to equitably
allocate funding among the school districts in the state in
a   manner   meeting      constitutional         requirements. It      is   the
duty of the legislature to rationally determine the level
of funding to ensure that the system of public schools is
adequate, thorough and efficient.                 It is the province of
the judiciary to declare a system of public school funding
in violation of the constitution when presented with an
appropriate        case    establishing          the    failure     of      the
legislature to meet its duties. The legislature alone has
the power     to     generate    revenue,          through   taxation       or
otherwise,    for    the    operation       of    the   system    of     public
schools. The judiciary shall not command the legislature to
take any action to generate revenue, through taxation or
otherwise in order to fulfill its duties to fully fund the
public school system.
Section 2.     That the Secretary of State shall endorse
the following statement on the proposed amendment:
SJ0004
STATE OF WYOMING                       18LSO-0400
This amendment would provide that the amount of funding
appropriated     to    create   and     maintain    the     public    school
system must be rationally determined by the legislature to
ensure it is adequate, thorough and efficient, while taking
into     account       currently       available        revenues      without
additional taxation and funding requirements that provide
for    the   health,   safety   and     welfare    of    citizens     of   the
state. The amendment would also provide that the judiciary
could still declare the school funding system in violation
of the constitution, though the judiciary could not command
the    legislature     to   generate    revenue    to    fund   the   public
school system.
(END)
SJ0004