18LSO-0294
AN     ACT   relating    to    eminent    domain;    reimposing       the
moratorium on the exercise of the power of condemnation for
wind    energy     collector   systems    for   a   period     of   time;
specifying    applicability;     and providing for      an effective
date.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Wyoming:
Section 1.    W.S. 1-26-815(d) is amended to read:
1-26-815.    Right of    eminent   domain    granted;    ways of
necessity for authorized businesses; purposes; extent.
(d)   No person qualified to exercise the condemnation
authority granted by this section, except a public utility
SF0047
STATE OF WYOMING                        18LSO-0294
that has been granted a certificate of public convenience
and necessity pursuant to W.S. 37-2-205, shall exercise the
authority       for    the    erection,      placement       or   expansion     of
collector       systems      associated      with    commercial        facilities
generating electricity from wind.                   The prohibition imposed
by this subsection shall be effective immediately and shall
end    June    30,    2015    2023,    or    upon   the     effective    date    of
legislation establishing additional conditions for the use
of condemnation authority for the erection, placement or
expansion of collector systems associated with commercial
facilities       generating       electricity        from     wind,     whichever
occurs earlier.            As used in this subsection, "collector
systems       associated      with    commercial     facilities        generating
electricity from wind" means the conductor infrastructure,
including conductors, towers, substations, switchgear and
other     components         necessary      to   deliver      power     from    any
commercial facility generating electricity from wind up to
but not including electric substations or interconnections
facilities           associated       with       existing         or     proposed
transmission lines that serve load or that export energy
from Wyoming.
SF0047
STATE OF WYOMING                     18LSO-0294
Section 2.       The moratorium imposed by this act shall
not     apply     to    prohibit     the       exercise   of   condemnation
authority granted under W.S. 1-26-815(d) if an action to
condemn the property was filed in court and the initial
funds required by W.S. 1-26-513(a) were deposited prior to
the effective date of this act.
Section    3.    This   act    is   effective      immediately   upon
completion of all acts necessary for a bill to become law
as     provided    by    Article     4,    Section    8   of   the   Wyoming
Constitution.
(END)
SF0047