18LSO-0193
A   JOINT     RESOLUTION        proposing     to       amend     the   Wyoming
Constitution to index public school funding to the public
school      funding      of    Wyoming's     neighboring         states     and
providing a ballot statement.
BE IT RESOLVED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WYOMING,
two-thirds of all the members of the two houses, voting
separately, concurring therein:
Section    1.     The following      proposal     to amend Wyoming
Constitution,       Article      7,    Section     9     is     proposed    for
submission to the electors of the State of Wyoming at the
next general election for approval or rejection to become
valid    as   a   part    of   the    Constitution      if     ratified    by   a
majority of the electors at the election:
SJ0001
STATE OF WYOMING                      18LSO-0193
Article      7,    Section      9.    Taxation    for   schools;     index
funding to that of neighboring states.
(a)    Subject to the limitations provided by subsection
(b)    of    this    section,         the   legislature    shall     make    such
further provision by taxation or otherwise, as with the
income arising from the general school fund will create and
maintain a thorough and efficient system of public schools,
adequate to         the proper instruction of             all youth       of the
state, between the ages of six and twenty-one years, free
of    charge;    and      in   view    of   such   provision    so   made,   the
legislature shall require that every child of sufficient
physical and mental ability shall attend a public school
during the period between six and eighteen years for a time
equivalent to three years, unless educated by other means.
(b)    Notwithstanding               any    provision         of      this
constitution         to    the    contrary,        the    legislature       shall
establish by law a mechanism to determine the on-going five
year average of the annual per pupil public school funding
for the states of Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nebraska, South
Dakota and Utah. This calculation shall include funding,
SJ0001
STATE OF WYOMING                         18LSO-0193
from any source, for: school operations; major and minor
school    maintenance;      capital       construction;      and     any   other
public     school        funding       deemed       appropriate       by     the
legislature.     Beginning       in    the    2019-2020     school    year   and
continuing      each    school     year      thereafter,    the    legislature
shall ensure this state's system of public schools receives
not less than one hundred percent (100%) and not more than
one hundred ten percent (110%) of the on-going five year
average of the annual per pupil public school funding for
the    states   of     Colorado,      Idaho,     Montana,   Nebraska,      South
Dakota and Utah multiplied by the number of students in
this state. The legislature shall not reduce funding for
public education by more than seven percent (7%) in any one
year to meet the requirements of this subsection.
Section 2.       That the Secretary of State shall endorse
the following statement on the proposed amendment:
SJ0001
STATE OF WYOMING                       18LSO-0193
This   amendment   would   require    the      legislature,    beginning
with the 2019-2020 school year, to fund the state's public
schools at one hundred percent (100%) to one hundred ten
percent (110%) of the per pupil funding average of public
school systems in Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nebraska, South
Dakota and Utah multiplied by the number of Wyoming public
school students. The funding average would be a five year
funding   average,   determined      on   an    on-going   basis.    Any
funding reductions would be limited to not more than seven
percent (7%) per year.
(END)
SJ0001