
  

  

 
220 ILCS 5/9-210.5

 
    
Amends the Public Utilities Act. Provides that an acquisition of a 
water or sewer utility shall be paid for by shareholders and not existing 
ratepayers (rather than charging ratepayers in the tariff group into which 
the water or sewer utility is to be combined specific rates). Changes the 
repeal date of provisions concerning valuation of water and sewer utilities 
from June 1, 2018 to June 1, 2021. Effective May 31, 2018.

  

  

  
    
AN ACT concerning regulation.

  
    
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois,
 
represented in the General Assembly:

  

 
    
Section 5. 
The Public Utilities Act is amended  by changing 
Section 9-210.5 as follows:
    
(220 ILCS 5/9-210.5)
    
(Section scheduled to be repealed on June 1, 2018)
    
Sec. 9-210.5. 
Valuation of water and sewer utilities. 
    
(a) In this Section:
    
    
"Disinterested" means that the person directly 
involved (1) is not a director, officer, or an employee of 
the large public utility or the water or sewer utility or 
its direct affiliates or subsidiaries for at least 12 
months before becoming engaged under this Section; (2) 
shall not derive a material financial benefit from the sale 
of the water or sewer utility other than fees for services 
rendered, and (3) shall not have a member of the person's 
immediate family, including a spouse, parents or spouse's 
parents, children or spouses of children, or siblings and 
their spouses or children, be a director, officer, or 
employee of either the large public utility or water or 
sewer utility or the water or sewer utility or its direct 
affiliates or subsidiaries for at least 12 months before 
becoming engaged under this Section  or receive a material 
financial benefit from the sale of the water or sewer 
utility other than fees for services rendered.
    
    
"District" means a service area of a large public 
utility whose customers are subject to the same rate 
tariff.
    
    
"Large public utility" means an investor-owned public 
utility that:
    
    
    
(1) is subject to regulation by the Illinois 
Commerce Commission under this Act;
    
    
    
(2) regularly provides water or sewer service to 
more than 30,000 customer connections;
    
    
    
(3) provides safe and adequate service; and
    
    
    
(4) is not a water or sewer utility as defined in 
this subsection (a).
    
    
"Next rate case" means a large public utility's first 
general rate case after the date the large public utility 
acquires the water or sewer utility where the acquired 
water or sewer utility's cost of service is considered as 
part of determining the large public utility's resulting 
rates.
    
    
"Prior rate case" means a large public utility's 
general rate case resulting in the rates in effect for the 
large public utility at the time it acquires the water or 
sewer utility.
    
    
"Utility service source" means the water or sewer 
utility or large public utility from which the customer 
receives its utility service type.
    
    
"Utility service type"  means water utility service or 
sewer utility service or water and sewer utility service.
    
    
"Water or sewer utility" means any of the following:
    
    
    
(1) a public utility that regularly provides water 
or sewer service to 6,000 or fewer customer 
connections;
    
    
    
(2) a water district, including, but not limited 
to, a public water district, water service district, or 
surface water protection district, or a sewer district 
of any kind established as a special district under the 
laws of this State that regularly provides water or 
sewer service to 7,500 or fewer customer connections;
    
    
    
(3) a waterworks system or sewerage system 
established under the Township Code that regularly 
provides water or sewer service to 7,500 or fewer 
customer connections; or
    
    
    
(4) a water system or sewer system owned by a 
municipality that regularly provides water or sewer 
service to 7,500 or fewer customer connections; and
    
    
    
(5) any other entity that regularly provides water 
or sewer service to 7,500 or fewer customer 
connections.
    
(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, a 
large public utility that acquires a water or sewer utility may 
request that the Commission use, and, if so requested, the 
Commission shall use, the procedures set forth under this 
Section to establish the ratemaking rate base of that water or 
sewer utility at the time when it is acquired by the large 
public utility.
    
(c) If a large public utility elects the procedures under 
this Section to establish the rate base of a water or sewer 
utility that it is acquiring, then 3 appraisals shall be 
performed. The average of these 3 appraisals shall represent 
the fair market value of the water or sewer utility that is 
being acquired. The appraisals shall be performed by 3 
appraisers selected by the Commission's water department 
manager and engaged by either the water or sewer utility being 
acquired or by the large public utility. The Commission's water 
department manager shall select the appraisers within 30 days 
after the water department manager is officially notified. Each 
appraiser shall be engaged on reasonable terms approved by the 
Commission. Each appraiser shall be a disinterested person 
licensed as a State certified general real estate appraiser 
under the Real Estate Appraiser Licensing Act of 2002.
    
Each appraiser shall:
    
    
(1) be sworn to determine the fair market value of the 
water or sewer utility by establishing the amount for which 
the water or sewer utility would be sold in a voluntary 
transaction between a willing buyer and willing seller 
under no obligation to buy or sell;
    
    
(2) determine fair market value in compliance with the 
Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice;
    
    
(3) engage one disinterested engineer who is licensed 
in this State to prepare an assessment of the tangible 
assets of the water or sewer utility, which is to be 
incorporated into the appraisal under the cost approach;
    
    
(4) if the water or sewer utility is a public utility 
that is regulated by the Commission, request from the 
manager of the Accounting Department a list of investments 
made by the water or sewer utility that had been disallowed 
previously and that shall be excluded from the calculation  
of the large public utility's rate base in its next rate 
case; and 
    
    
(5) return their appraisal, in writing, to the water or 
sewer utility and large public utility in a reasonable and 
timely manner.
    
If the appraiser cannot engage an engineer, as described in 
paragraph (3) of this subsection (c), within 30 days after the 
appraiser is engaged, then the Commission's water department 
manager shall recommend the engineer the appraiser should 
engage. The Commission's water department manager shall 
provide his or her recommendation within 30 days after he or 
she is officially notified of the appraiser's failure to engage 
an engineer and the appraiser shall promptly work to engage the 
recommended engineer. If the appraiser is unable to negotiate 
reasonable engagement terms with the recommended engineer 
within 15 days after the recommendation by the Commission's 
water department manager, then the appraiser shall notify the 
Commission's water department manager and the process shall be 
repeated until an engineer is successfully engaged.
    
(d) The lesser of (i) the purchase price or (ii) the fair 
market value determined under subsection (c) of this Section 
shall constitute the rate base associated with the water or 
sewer utility as acquired by and incorporated into the rate 
base of the district designated by the acquiring large public 
utility under this Section, subject to any adjustments that the 
Commission deems necessary to ensure such rate base reflects 
prudent and useful investments in the provision of public 
utility service.  The reasonable transaction and closing costs 
incurred by the large public utility shall be treated 
consistent with the applicable accounting standards under this 
Act. The amount of the appraiser's fees to be included in the 
transaction and closing costs shall not exceed the greater of 
$15,000 or 5% of the appraised value of the water or sewer 
utility being acquired. This rate base treatment shall not be 
deemed to violate this Act, including, but not limited to, any 
Sections in Articles VIII and IX of this Act that might be 
affected by this Section.  Any acquisition of a water or sewer 
utility 
shall be paid for by shareholders and not existing 
ratepayers
 
that affects the cumulative base rates of the large 
public utility's existing ratepayers in the tariff group into 
which the water or sewer utility is to be combined by less than 
(1) 2.5% at the time of the acquisition for any single 
acquisition completed under this Section or (2) 5% for all 
acquisitions completed under this Section before the 
Commission's final order in the next rate case shall not be 
deemed to violate Section 7-204 or any other provision of this 
Act
.
    
In the Commission's order that approves the large public 
utility's acquisition of the water or sewer utility, the 
Commission shall issue its decision establishing (1) the 
ratemaking rate base of the water or sewer utility and (2) the 
district or tariff group with which the water or sewer utility 
shall be combined for ratemaking purposes.
    
(e) If the water or sewer utility being acquired is owned 
by the State or any political subdivision thereof, then the 
water or sewer utility must inform the public of  the terms of 
its acquisition by the large public utility by (1) holding a 
public meeting prior to the acquisition and (2) causing to be 
published, in a newspaper of general circulation in the area 
that the water or sewer utility operates, a notice setting 
forth the terms of its acquisition by the large public utility 
and options that shall be available to assist customers to pay 
their bills after the acquisition. 
    
(f) The large public utility shall recommend the district 
or tariff group of which the water or sewer utility shall, for 
ratemaking purposes, become a part after the acquisition.  The 
Commission's recommended district or tariff group shall be 
consistent with the large public utility's recommendation, 
unless such recommendation can be shown to be contrary to the 
public interest.
    
(g) From the date of acquisition until the date that new 
rates are effective in the acquiring large public utility's 
next rate case, the customers of the acquired water or sewer 
utility shall pay the then-existing rates of the district or 
tariff group ordered by the Commission; provided, that, if the 
application of such then-existing rates of the large public 
utility to customers of the acquired water or sewer utility 
using 54,000 gallons annually results in an increase to the 
total annual bill of customers of the acquired water or sewer 
utility, exclusive of fire service or related charges, then the 
large public utility's rates charged to the customers of the 
acquired water or sewer utility shall be uniformly reduced, if 
any reduction is required, by the percent that results in the 
total annual bill, exclusive of fire services or related 
charges, for the customers of the acquired water or sewer 
utility using 54,000 gallons being equal to 1.5% of the latest 
median household income as reported by the United States Census 
Bureau for the most applicable community or county.  For each 
customer of the water or sewer utility with potable water usage 
values that cannot be reasonably obtained, a value of 4,500 
gallons per month shall be assigned.  These rates shall not be 
deemed to violate this Act including, but not limited to, 
Section 9-101 and any other applicable Sections in Articles 
VIII and IX of this Act.  The Commission shall issue its 
decision establishing the rates effective for the water or 
sewer utility immediately following an acquisition in its order 
approving the acquisition.
    
(h) In the acquiring large public utility's next rate case, 
the water or sewer utility and the district or tariff group 
ordered by the Commission and their costs of service shall be 
combined under the same rate tariff.  This rate tariff shall be 
based on allocation of costs of service of the acquired water 
or sewer utility and the large public utility's district or 
tariff group ordered by the Commission and utilizing a rate 
design that does not distinguish among customers on the basis 
of utility service source or type. This rate tariff shall not 
be deemed to violate this Act including, but not limited to, 
Section 9-101 of this Act.
    
(i) Any post-acquisition improvements made by the large 
public utility in the water or sewer utility shall accrue a 
cost for financing set at the large public utility's determined 
rate for allowance for funds used during construction, 
inclusive of the debt, equity, and income tax gross up 
components, after the date on which the expenditure was 
incurred by the large public utility until the investment has 
been in service for a 4-year period or, if sooner, until the 
time the rates are implemented in the large public utility's 
next rate case.
    
Any post-acquisition improvements made by the large public 
utility in the water or sewer utility shall not be depreciated 
for ratemaking purposes from the date on which the expenditure 
was incurred by the large public utility until the investment 
has been in service for a 4-year period or, if sooner, until 
the time the rates are implemented in the large public 
utility's next rate case.
    
(j) This Section shall be exclusively applied to large 
public utilities in the voluntary and mutually agreeable 
acquisition of water or sewer utilities.  Any petitions filed 
with the Commission related to the acquisitions described in 
this Section, including petitions seeking approvals or 
certificates required by this Act, shall be deemed approved 
unless the Commission issues its final order within 11 months 
after the date the large public utility filed its initial 
petition.  This Section shall only apply to utilities providing 
water or sewer service and shall not be construed in any manner 
to apply to electric corporations, natural gas corporations, or 
any other utility subject to this Act.
    
(k) Nothing in this Section shall prohibit a party from 
declining to proceed with an acquisition or be deemed as 
establishing the final purchase price of an acquisition.
    
(l) In the Commission's order that approves the large 
utility's acquisition of the water or sewer utility, the 
Commission shall address each aspect of the acquisition 
transaction for which approval is required under the Act. 
    
(m) Any contractor or subcontractor that performs work on a 
water or sewer utility acquired by a large public utility under 
this Section shall be a responsible bidder as described in 
Section 30-22 of the Illinois Procurement Code. The contractor 
or subcontractor shall submit evidence of meeting the 
requirements to be a responsible bidder as described in Section 
30-22 to the water or sewer utility. Any new water or sewer 
facility built as a result of the acquisition shall require the 
contractor to enter into a project labor agreement. The large 
public utility acquiring the water or sewer utility shall offer 
employee positions to qualified employees of the acquired water 
or sewer utility. 
    
(n) This Section is repealed on June 1, 
2021
 
2018
. 


(Source: P.A. 98-213, eff. 8-9-13.)

  

 
    
Section 99. 
Effective date. 
This Act takes effect May 31, 
2018.
 


