
  

  

 
 
215 ILCS 139/10
 
215 ILCS 139/15

 
    
Amends the Uniform Health Care Services Benefits Information Card Act. 
Includes dental service plans under the definition of "health benefit 
plan". Requires a uniform health care benefit information card or other 
technology for a dental service plan to include a statement that the dental 
service plan is fully insured. Effective immediately.

  

  

  
    
AN ACT concerning regulation.

  
    
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois,
 
represented in the General Assembly:

  

 
    
Section 5. 
The Uniform Health Care Service Benefits 
Information Card Act is amended  by changing Sections 10 and 15 
as follows:






    
(215 ILCS 139/10)






    
Sec. 10. 
Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the following 
terms have the
meanings given in this Section.


    
"Department" means the Department of Insurance.


    
"Director" means the Director of Insurance.


    
"Health benefit plan" means an accident and health 
insurance policy or
certificate subject to the Illinois 
Insurance Code, a voluntary health services
plan subject to the 
Voluntary Health Services Plans Act, a health maintenance

organization subscriber contract subject to the Health 
Maintenance
Organization Act, a plan provided by a multiple 
employer welfare arrangement, 
a dental service plan subject to 
the Dental Service Plan Act,

or a plan provided by another 
benefit arrangement.  Without limitation, "health
benefit plan" 
does not mean any of the following types of insurance:




    
    
(1) accident;




    
    
(2) credit;




    
    
(3) disability income;




    
    
(4) long-term or nursing home care;




    
    
(5) specified disease;




    
    
(6) 
dental or
 vision;




    
    
(7) coverage issued as a supplement to liability 
insurance;




    
    
(8) medical payments under automobile or homeowners;




    
    
(9) insurance under which benefits are payable with or 
without regard to
fault as statutorily required to be 
contained in any liability policy or
equivalent 
self-insurance;




    
    
(10) hospital income or indemnity; and




    
    
(11) self-insured health benefit plans under the 
federal Employee
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.


(Source: P.A. 92-106, eff. 1-1-02.)


    
(215 ILCS 139/15)
    
Sec. 15. 
Uniform health care benefit information cards 
required. 
    
(a) A health benefit plan that issues a card or other 
technology and
provides coverage for health care services 
including prescription drugs or
devices also referred to as 
health care benefits and an administrator of such a
plan 
including, but not limited to, third-party administrators for 
self-insured
plans and state-administered plans shall issue to 
its insureds a card or other
technology containing uniform 
health care benefit information.  The health care
benefit 
information card or other technology shall specifically 
identify and
display the following mandatory data elements on 
the card:
    
    
(1) processor control number, if required for claims 
adjudication;
    
    
(2) group number;
    
    
(3) card issuer identifier;
    
    
(4) cardholder ID number; and
    
    
(5) cardholder name.
    
(b) The uniform health care benefit information card or 
other technology
shall specifically identify and display the 
following mandatory data elements
on the back of the card:
    
    
(1) claims submission names and addresses; and
    
    
(2) help desk telephone numbers and names.
    
(b-5) A uniform health care benefit information card or 
other technology for a dental service plan shall include a 
statement that the dental service plan is fully insured.
 
    
(c) A new uniform health care benefit information card or 
other technology
shall be issued by a health benefit plan upon 
enrollment and reissued upon any
change in the insured's 
coverage that affects mandatory data elements contained
on the 
card.
    
(d) Notwithstanding subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this 
Section, a discounted health care services plan administrator 
shall issue to its beneficiaries a card containing the 
following mandatory data elements:
    
    
(1) an Internet website for beneficiaries to access 
up-to-date lists of preferred providers;
    
    
(2) a toll-free help desk number for beneficiaries and 
providers to access up-to-date lists of preferred 
providers and additional information about the discounted 
health care services plan;
    
    
(3) the name or logo of the provider network;
    
    
(4) a group number, if necessary for the processing of 
benefits; 
    
    
(5) a cardholder ID number;
    
    
(6) the cardholder's name or a space to permit the 
cardholder to print his or her name, if the cardholder pays 
a periodic charge for use of the card; 
    
    
(7) a processor control number, if required for claims 
adjudication; and 
    
    
(8) a statement that the plan is not insurance.
    
(e) As used in this Section, "discounted health care 
services plan administrator" means any person, partnership, or 
corporation, other than an insurer, health service 
corporation, limited health service organization holding a 
certificate of authority under the Limited Health Service 
Organization Act, or health maintenance organization holding a 
certificate of authority under the Health Maintenance 
Organization Act that arranges, contracts with, or administers 
contracts with a provider whereby insureds or beneficiaries are 
provided an incentive to use health care services provided by 
health care services providers under a discounted health care 
services plan in which there are no other incentives, such as 
copayment, coinsurance, or any other reimbursement 
differential, for beneficiaries to utilize the provider. 
"Discounted health care services plan administrator" also 
includes any person, partnership, or corporation, other than an 
insurer, health service corporation, limited health service 
organization holding a certificate of authority under the 
Limited Health Service Organization Act, or health maintenance 
organization holding a certificate of authority under the 
Health Maintenance Organization Act that enters into a contract 
with another administrator to enroll beneficiaries or insureds 
in a preferred provider program marketed as an independently 
identifiable program based on marketing materials or member 
benefit identification cards. 
(Source: P.A. 96-1326, eff. 1-1-11.)

 
    
Section 99. 
Effective date. 
This Act takes effect upon 
becoming law.
 

  


