
  

  

  

  
    
AN ACT concerning education.

  
    
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois,
 
represented in the General Assembly:

  

 
    
Section 5. 
The School Code is amended  by changing Section 
2-3.64a-5 as follows:
    
(105 ILCS 5/2-3.64a-5)
    
Sec. 2-3.64a-5. 
State goals and assessment.
    
(a)  For the assessment and accountability purposes of this 
Section, "students" includes those students enrolled in a 
public or State-operated elementary school, secondary school, 
or cooperative or joint agreement with a governing body or 
board of control, a charter school operating in compliance with 
the Charter Schools Law, a school operated by a regional office 
of education under Section 13A-3 of this Code, or a public 
school administered by a local public agency or the Department 
of Human Services.
    
(b)  The State Board of Education shall establish the 
academic standards that are to be applicable to students who 
are subject to State assessments under this Section.  The State 
Board of Education shall not establish any such standards in 
final form without first providing opportunities for public 
participation and local input in the development of the final 
academic standards.  Those opportunities shall include a 
well-publicized period of public comment and opportunities to 
file written comments.
    
(c)  Beginning no later than the 2014-2015 school year, the 
State Board of Education shall annually assess all students 
enrolled in grades 3 through 8 in English language arts and 
mathematics.
    
Beginning no later than the 2017-2018 school year, the 
State Board of Education shall annually assess all students in 
science at one grade in grades 3 through 5, at one grade in 
grades 6 through 8, and at one grade in grades 9 through 12.
    
The State Board of Education shall annually assess schools 
that operate a secondary education program, as defined in 
Section 22-22 of this Code, in English language arts and 
mathematics.  The State Board of Education shall administer no 
more than 3 assessments, per student, of English language arts 
and mathematics for students in a secondary education program.   
One of these assessments shall include a college and career 
ready determination that shall be accepted by this State's 
public institutions of higher education, as defined in the 
Board of Higher Education Act, for the purpose of student 
application or admissions consideration. 
The assessment 
administered by the State Board of Education for the purpose of 
student application to or admissions consideration by 
institutions of higher education must be administered on a 
school day during regular student attendance hours.
 
    
Students who are not assessed for college and career ready 
determinations may not receive a regular high school diploma 
unless the student is exempted from taking State assessments 
under subsection (d) of this Section because (i) the student's 
individualized educational program developed under Article 14 
of this Code identifies the State assessment as inappropriate 
for the student, (ii) the student is enrolled in a program of 
adult and continuing education, as defined in the Adult 
Education Act, (iii) the school district is not required to 
assess the individual student for purposes of accountability 
under federal No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 requirements, 
(iv) the student has been determined to be an English learner 
and has been enrolled in schools in the United States for less 
than 12 months, or (v) the student is otherwise identified by 
the State Board of Education, through rules, as being exempt 
from the assessment.
    
The State Board of Education shall not assess students 
under this Section in subjects not required by this Section.
    
Districts shall inform their students of the timelines and 
procedures applicable to their participation in every yearly 
administration of the State assessments.
The State Board of 
Education shall establish periods of time in each school year 
during which State assessments shall occur to meet the 
objectives of this Section.
    
(d)  Every individualized educational program as described 
in Article 14 shall identify if the State assessment or 
components thereof are appropriate for the student.  The State 
Board of Education shall develop rules governing the 
administration of an alternate assessment that may be available 
to students for whom participation in this State's regular 
assessments is not appropriate, even with accommodations as 
allowed under this Section.
    
Students receiving special education services whose 
individualized educational programs identify them as eligible 
for the alternative State assessments nevertheless shall have 
the option of taking this State's regular assessment that 
includes a college and career ready determination, which shall 
be administered in accordance with the eligible accommodations 
appropriate for meeting these students' respective needs.
    
All students determined to be English learners shall 
participate in the State assessments, excepting those students 
who have been enrolled in schools in the United States for less 
than 12 months.   Such students may be exempted from 
participation in one annual administration of the English 
language arts assessment.  Any student determined to be an 
English learner shall receive appropriate assessment 
accommodations, including language supports, which shall be 
established by rule.  Approved assessment accommodations must 
be provided until the student's English language skills develop 
to the extent that the student is no longer considered to be an 
English learner, as demonstrated through a State-identified 
English language proficiency assessment.
    
(e)  The results or scores of each assessment taken under 
this Section shall be made available to the parents of each 
student.
    
In each school year, the scores attained by a student on 
the State assessment that includes a college and career ready 
determination must be placed in the student's permanent record 
and must be entered on the student's transcript pursuant to 
rules that the State Board of Education shall adopt for that 
purpose in accordance with Section 3 of the Illinois School 
Student Records Act.  In each school year, the scores attained 
by a student on the State assessments administered in grades 3 
through 8 must be placed in the student's temporary record.
    
(f)  All schools shall administer an academic assessment of 
English language proficiency in oral language (listening and 
speaking) and reading and writing skills to all children 
determined to be English learners.
    
(g)  All schools in this State that are part of the sample 
drawn by the National Center for Education Statistics, in 
collaboration with their school districts and the State Board 
of Education, shall administer the biennial academic 
assessments under the National Assessment of Educational 
Progress carried out under Section 411(b)(2) of the federal 
National Education Statistics Act of 1994 (20 U.S.C. 9010) if 
the U.S. Secretary of Education pays the costs of administering 
the assessments.
    
(h)  Subject to available funds to this State for the 
purpose of student assessment, the State Board of Education 
shall provide additional assessments and assessment resources 
that may be used by school districts for local assessment 
purposes. The State Board of Education shall annually 
distribute a listing of these additional resources.
    
(i)  For the purposes of this subsection (i), "academically 
based assessments" means assessments consisting of questions 
and answers that are measurable and quantifiable to measure the 
knowledge, skills, and ability of students in the subject 
matters covered by the assessments. All assessments 
administered pursuant to this Section must be academically 
based assessments. The scoring of academically based 
assessments shall be reliable, valid, and fair and shall meet 
the guidelines for assessment development and use prescribed by 
the American Psychological Association, the National Council 
on Measurement in Education, and the American Educational 
Research Association.
    
The State Board of Education shall review the use of all 
assessment item types in order to ensure that they are valid 
and reliable indicators of student performance aligned to the 
learning standards being assessed and that the development, 
administration, and scoring of these item types are justifiable 
in terms of cost.
    
(j)  The State Superintendent of Education shall appoint a 
committee of no more than 21 members, consisting of parents, 
teachers, school administrators, school board members, 
assessment experts, regional superintendents of schools, and 
citizens, to review the State assessments administered by the 
State Board of Education. The Committee shall select one of its 
members as its chairperson. The Committee shall meet on an 
ongoing basis to review the content and design of the 
assessments (including whether the requirements of subsection 
(i) of this Section have been met), the time and money expended 
at the local and State levels to prepare for and administer the 
assessments, the collective results of the assessments as 
measured against the stated purpose of assessing student 
performance, and other issues involving the assessments 
identified by the Committee. The Committee shall make periodic 
recommendations to the State Superintendent of Education and 
the General Assembly concerning the assessments. 
    
(k)  The State Board of Education may adopt rules to 
implement this Section.


(Source: P.A. 98-972, eff. 8-15-14; 99-30, eff. 7-10-15; 
99-185, eff. 1-1-16; 99-642, eff. 7-28-16.)

 
    
Section 99. 
Effective date. 
This Act takes effect July 1, 
2017.
 

  


