
  

  

 
15 ILCS 505/16.8 new
30 ILCS 105/5.878 new

 
    
Amends the State Treasurer Act. Creates the Illinois Higher Education 
Savings Program. Provides for the implementation of and requirements for 
the Program. Provides for the State Treasurer's duties under the Program. 
Provides that the State Treasurer may adopt any rules that may be necessary 
to implement the Program. Amends the State Finance Act. Creates the 
Illinois Higher Education Savings Program Fund as a special fund in the 
State treasury. Defines terms.

  

  

  
    
AN ACT concerning State government.

  
    
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois,
 
represented in the General Assembly:

  

 
    
Section 5. 
The State Treasurer Act is amended  by adding 
Section 16.8 as follows:
    
(15 ILCS 505/16.8  new)
    
Sec. 16.8. 
Illinois Higher Education Savings Program.
    
(a)   As used in this Section:
    
    
"Custodial account" means a 529 plan account under 
Section 529 of the Internal Revenue Code where the State 
Treasurer serves as the custodian of the account with the 
child as the beneficiary.  The custodial account is not a 
standard account.
    
    
"Fund" means the Illinois Higher Education Savings 
Program Fund.
    
    
"Standard account" means a 529 plan account under 
Section 529 of the Internal Revenue Code, created pursuant 
to Section 16.5 of this Act.
    
    
"Internal Revenue Code" means Internal Revenue Code of 
1986, or any successor law, in effect for the calendar 
year.
    
    
"Low-income households" means households with income 
less than 250% of the federal poverty line.
    
    
"Program" means the Illinois Higher Education Savings 
Program.
    
    
"Post-secondary education" means a college, 
university, vocational school, and any two or four-year 
degree program from an accredited educational institution.
    
    
"Seed" means the initial contribution into an Account.
    
    
"State Treasurer" means the Illinois State Treasurer.
    
(b)   The State Treasurer shall establish the Illinois Higher 
Education Savings Program as part of the College Savings Pool 
described in Section 16.5 of this Act. The State Treasurer 
shall administer the Program for the purposes of expanding 
access to higher education through savings. The Program shall 
include the following features:
    
    
(1)     All children born or adopted in Illinois and who 
reside in Illinois at the time of birth or adoption are 
eligible for the Program.
    
    
(2)     No later than 90 days after issuing a birth 
certificate, the Illinois Department of Public Health 
shall provide the State Treasurer with data from Illinois 
birth records. All such information shall be strictly 
confidential and shall not be subject to release under the 
Freedom of Information Act.
    
    
(3)    After receiving birth record data for a child born 
in the State of Illinois from the Department of Public 
Health, the State Treasurer shall open a custodial account 
through the Program. A parent or legal guardian may choose 
to opt out of the Program at the time of the birth 
certificate application process.
    
    
(4)    The Department of Public Health and the State 
Registrar of Vital Records shall modify the Certificate of 
Live Birth Worksheet and other necessary forms at the 
request of the State Treasurer for the purposes of 
implementing the Illinois Higher Education Savings 
Program.
    
(c)   The State Treasurer shall establish custodial accounts 
in accordance with the following provisions:
    
    
(1)    Upon establishment of a custodial account, the 
State Treasurer shall make a seed deposit on behalf of the 
beneficiary into the custodial account, as provided in 
paragraphs (8) and (9) of this subsection (c).
    
    
(2)     The State Treasurer will provide an annual match as 
provided in paragraphs (8) and (9) of this subsection (c) 
into the custodial account on a one-to-one dollar basis for 
beneficiaries in low-income households, that are 18 years 
of age or younger, and that are listed as a beneficiary of 
a standard account under Section 16.5 of this Act. The 
legal guardian and owner of the standard account will be 
able to view the aggregate amount of the standard and 
custodial accounts.
    
    
(3)    Subject to funding, the State Treasurer may provide 
additional savings incentives, including conditional cash 
transfers that provide a savings incentive based on 
specific actions taken, for beneficiaries in low-income 
households.
    
    
(4)    If sufficient funds are not available, the State 
Treasurer may reduce the seed amount deposited in a 
custodial account and any match temporarily. In the case of 
limited funding, the seed amount will take priority over 
the match incentives.
    
    
(5)    Deposits into the custodial account shall be made 
by the State Treasurer from funds appropriated by the 
General Assembly or received as gifts, grants, or 
contributions into the Higher Education Savings Program 
Fund.
    
    
(6)    Distributions from the custodial account shall be 
permitted for qualifying post-secondary education expenses 
in compliance with Section 529 of the Internal Revenue Code 
only. Distributions from the custodial account must be made 
prior to the beneficiary attaining the age of 29.
    
    
(7)    For beneficiaries who serve in a national service 
program, including, but not limited to, the United States 
Military or the Peace Corp, each year of service shall 
increase the maturity date by one year. For beneficiaries 
that are serving a sentence as a result of a criminal 
conviction or juvenile adjudication between the ages of 18 
and 29, each year of confinement shall increase the 
maturity date by one year.
    
    
(8)    Between establishment of the Program and January 1, 
2021, the seed and match amounts set forth in paragraphs 
(1) and (2)  of this subsection (c) shall be as follows: (i) 
$50 initial seed and (ii) a total match of $150 annually 
for low-income households.
    
    
(9)   The State Treasurer shall adjust the seed deposit 
amount and the annual match beginning July 1, 2021, and at 
minimum every 5 years thereafter, based on an analysis of 
the consumer price index. Adjustments to the seed and match 
amounts shall be calculated by multiplying the current seed 
amount by the percentage increase, if any, in the Consumer 
Price Index for all Urban Consumers since the establishment 
of the Program or, after July 1, 2021, since the date of 
the last adjustment, and rounding that result to the 
nearest 5 dollars.
    
    
(10)    If a beneficiary does not use all funds in the 
custodial account for a qualified expense and within the 
timeline described in paragraphs (6) and (7) of this 
subsection (c), any seed or match funds contributed by the 
State Treasurer and any earnings from those funds shall be 
forfeited and remain in the Higher Education Program Fund.
    
    
(11)    If a beneficiary dies prior to the age of 29, any 
seed or match funds contributed by the State of Illinois, 
and any earnings from those funds shall be forfeited and 
remain in the Higher Education Program Fund.
    
(d)   If a beneficiary is not a resident of Illinois, (i) the 
beneficiary shall not be eligible for the match incentives 
described in paragraph (2) of subsection (c) of this Section 
during any period of time when he or she is not residing in the 
state of Illinois; and (ii) the custodial account shall 
otherwise be maintained by the State Treasurer as set forth is 
paragraph (1) and paragraphs (4) through (10) of subsection 
(c).
    
(e)   A legal guardian, residing in Illinois, of a child who 
is born in Illinois before the implementation date or a child 
born outside of Illinois and who is 15 years of age or younger, 
may apply with the Office of the Illinois State Treasurer to 
enroll his or her child in the Program as a beneficiary. This 
new enrollee would be eligible for the match incentive 
described in paragraphs (8) and (9) of subsection (c) of this 
Section, but is not eligible for the seed amount.
    
(f)   The Illinois Higher Education Savings Program Fund is 
hereby established. The Fund shall be the official repository 
of all contributions, appropriations, interest and dividend 
payments, gifts, or other financial assets received by State 
Treasurer in connection with the operation of the Program. All 
such moneys shall be deposited in the Fund and held by the 
State Treasurer as custodian thereof, outside of the State 
Treasury, separate and apart from all public moneys or funds of 
this State.
    
All interest or other earnings accruing or received on 
amounts in the Illinois Higher Education Savings Program Fund 
shall be credited to and retained by the Fund. Moneys, 
interest, or other earnings paid into the Fund shall not be 
transferred or allocated by the State Treasurer or the State 
Comptroller to any other fund, nor shall the Governor authorize 
any such transfer or allocation, while any contracts are 
outstanding. In addition, no moneys, interest, or other 
earnings paid into the Fund shall be used, temporarily or 
otherwise, for inter-fund borrowing or be otherwise used or 
appropriated, except as expressly authorized in this Act.
    
(g)     The State Treasurer may develop financial capability 
programs and education that support the financial literacy of 
beneficiaries and their legal guardians impacted by the Program 
in collaboration with State agencies, including the State Board 
of Education and the Department of Human Services, and existing 
nonprofit agencies working with low-income families that 
specialize in financial education delivery.
    
(h)     The Illinois Higher Education Savings Program shall be 
included as part of the audit of the College Savings Pool 
described in Section 16.5 of this Act.
    
(i)     The Illinois Higher Education Savings Program shall be 
implemented, and enrollment of beneficiaries shall begin in 
2018. The State Treasurer may establish an implementation 
timeline based on funding availability. Upon implementation of 
the Program, the State Treasurer shall include information on 
savings rates and match savings rates in the State Treasurer's 
annual financial report to the Governor and General Assembly.
    
(j)     The Higher Education Savings Program Act is subject to 
appropriation by the General Assembly. If the State Treasurer 
does not secure adequate funds to implement the Program within 
the time frame set forth under this Section, Program 
implementation may be delayed while the State Treasurer makes 
good faith efforts to secure necessary funding. The State 
Treasurer may accept gifts, grants, awards, matching 
contributions, interest income and appropriations from 
individuals, businesses, governments, and other third-party 
sources to implement the Program on terms that the Treasurer 
deems advisable. Moneys received under this Section may be 
expended for purposes consistent with the conditions under 
which those moneys are received, subject to appropriations made 
by the General Assembly for those purposes.
    
(k)     The State Treasurer may adopt, in accordance with the 
Illinois Administrative Procedure Act, any rules that may be 
necessary to implement the Program as described in this 
Section.

  
    
Section 10. 
The State Finance Act is amended by adding 
Section 5.878 as follows:
    
(30 ILCS 105/5.878 new)
    
Sec. 5.878. 
The Illinois Higher Education Savings Program 
Fund.


