
  

  

 
20 ILCS 415/4c
  
from Ch. 127, par. 63b104c
20 ILCS 3930/16 new
730 ILCS 5/5-8-8
730 ILCS 5/5-8-9 new

 
    
Amends the  Personnel Code.  Provides for exemption from the Code of  
employees having demonstrable, defined advanced skills in statistical 
research and data analytics who are employed in research and analysis units 
of executive branch agencies or whose duties are primarily focused on 
developing information sharing capabilities across executive branch 
agencies and between State agencies and units of local government.  Amends 
the Criminal Justice Information Act. Abolishes the Illinois Integrated 
Justice System Implementation Board. Amends the Unified Code of 
Corrections.  Creates the Illinois State Criminal Justice Data, Research, 
and Implementation Advisory Committee to (1) examine existing State and 
local criminal justice data collection systems and assess agencies' 
capacities to effectively analyze data and evaluate criminal justice trends 
and programming based on national best practices; and (2) publish an annual 
report, detailing its findings and recommendations to the General Assembly 
and the Governor.  Provides that the administrative support for the 
Committee shall be provided by the Illinois Sentencing Policy Advisory 
Council.  Provides that each department, agency, board, or authority of the 
State or any unit of local government shall provide records or other 
information to the Committee as requested by the Committee to carry out its 
duties, provided that the Committee and provider of the information shall 
make appropriate arrangements to ensure that the Committee and provider of 
the information to the Committee does not violate any applicable laws.

  

  

  
    
AN ACT concerning data.

  
    
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois,
 
represented in the General Assembly:

  

 
    
Section 5. 
The Personnel Code is amended by changing 
Section 4c as follows:
    
(20 ILCS 415/4c)
  
(from Ch. 127, par. 63b104c)
    
Sec. 4c. 
General exemptions. 
  The following positions in 
State
service shall be exempt from jurisdictions A, B, and C, 
unless the
jurisdictions shall be extended as provided in this 
Act:



    
    
(1) All officers elected by the people.



    
    
(2) All positions under the Lieutenant Governor, 
Secretary of State,
State Treasurer, State Comptroller, 
State Board of Education, Clerk of
the Supreme Court,

Attorney General, and State Board of Elections.



    
    
(3) Judges, and officers and employees of the courts, 
and notaries
public.



    
    
(4) All officers and employees of the Illinois General 
Assembly, all
employees of legislative commissions, all 
officers and employees of  the
Illinois Legislative 
Reference Bureau, the Legislative
Research Unit, and the 
Legislative Printing Unit.



    
    
(5) All positions in the Illinois National Guard and 
Illinois State
Guard, paid from federal funds or positions

in the State  Military Service filled by enlistment and paid 
from State
funds.



    
    
(6) All employees of the Governor at the executive 
mansion and on
his immediate personal staff.



    
    
(7) Directors of Departments, the Adjutant General, 
the Assistant
Adjutant General, the Director of the 
Illinois Emergency
Management Agency, members of boards 
and commissions,  and all other
positions appointed by the 
Governor by and with the consent of the
Senate.



    
    
(8) The presidents, other principal administrative 
officers, and
teaching, research and extension faculties 
of
Chicago State University, Eastern Illinois University, 
Governors State
University, Illinois State University, 
Northeastern Illinois University,
Northern Illinois 
University, Western Illinois University, the Illinois

Community College Board, Southern Illinois
University, 
Illinois Board of Higher Education, University of

Illinois, State Universities Civil Service System, 
University Retirement
System of Illinois, and the 
administrative officers and scientific and
technical staff 
of the Illinois State Museum.



    
    
(9) All other employees except the presidents, other 
principal
administrative officers, and teaching, research 
and extension faculties
of the universities under the 
jurisdiction of the Board of Regents and
the colleges and 
universities under the  jurisdiction of the Board of

Governors of State Colleges and Universities, Illinois 
Community College
Board, Southern Illinois University, 
Illinois Board of Higher Education,
Board of Governors of 
State Colleges and Universities, the Board of
Regents, 
University  of Illinois, State Universities Civil Service

System, University Retirement System of Illinois, so long 
as these are
subject to the provisions of the State 
Universities Civil Service Act.



    
    
(10) The State Police so long as they are subject to 
the merit
provisions of the State Police Act.



    
    
(11) (Blank).



    
    
(12) The technical and engineering staffs of the 
Department of
Transportation, the Department of Nuclear 
Safety, the Pollution Control
Board, and the Illinois 
Commerce Commission, and the technical and engineering

staff providing architectural and engineering services in 
the Department of
Central Management Services.



    
    
(13) All employees of the Illinois State Toll Highway 
Authority.



    
    
(14) The Secretary of the Illinois Workers' 
Compensation Commission.



    
    
(15) All persons who are appointed or employed by the 
Director of
Insurance  under authority of Section 202 of the 
Illinois Insurance Code
to assist the Director  of Insurance 
in discharging his responsibilities
relating to the 
rehabilitation, liquidation, conservation, and
dissolution 
of companies that are subject to the jurisdiction of the

Illinois  Insurance Code.



    
    
(16) All employees of the St. Louis Metropolitan Area 
Airport
Authority.



    
    
(17) All investment officers employed by the Illinois 
State Board of
Investment.



    
    
(18) Employees of the Illinois Young Adult 
Conservation Corps program,
administered by the Illinois 
Department of Natural Resources, authorized
grantee under 
Title VIII of the Comprehensive
Employment and Training Act 
of 1973, 29 USC 993.



    
    
(19) Seasonal employees of the Department of 
Agriculture for the
operation of the Illinois State Fair 
and the DuQuoin State Fair, no one
person receiving more 
than 29 days of such employment in any calendar year.



    
    
(20) All "temporary" employees hired under the 
Department of Natural
Resources' Illinois Conservation 
Service, a youth
employment program that hires young people 
to work in State parks for a period
of one year or less.



    
    
(21) All hearing officers of the Human Rights 
Commission.



    
    
(22) All employees of the Illinois Mathematics and 
Science Academy.



    
    
(23) All employees of the Kankakee River Valley Area

Airport Authority.



    
    
(24) The commissioners and employees of the Executive 
Ethics
Commission.


    
    
(25) The Executive Inspectors General, including 
special Executive
Inspectors General, and employees of 
each Office of an
Executive Inspector General.


    
    
(26) The commissioners and employees of the 
Legislative Ethics
Commission.



    
    
(27) The Legislative Inspector General, including 
special Legislative
Inspectors General, and employees of 
the Office of
the Legislative Inspector General.



    
    
(28) The Auditor General's Inspector General and 
employees of the Office
of the Auditor General's Inspector 
General.



    
    
(29) All employees of the Illinois Power Agency. 
    
    
(30) Employees having demonstrable, defined advanced 
skills in accounting, financial reporting, or technical 
expertise who are employed within executive branch 
agencies and whose duties are directly related to the 
submission to the Office of the Comptroller of financial 
information for the publication of the Comprehensive 
Annual Financial Report (CAFR). 
    
    
(31)  All employees of the Illinois Sentencing Policy 
Advisory Council. 
    
    
(32)  Employees having demonstrable, defined advanced 
skills in statistical research and data analytics who are 
employed in research and analysis units of executive branch 
agencies or whose duties are primarily focused on 
developing information sharing capabilities across 
executive branch agencies and between State agencies and 
units of local government.
 
(Source: P.A. 97-618, eff. 10-26-11; 97-1055, eff. 8-23-12; 
98-65, eff. 7-15-13.)


    
Section 10. 
The Illinois Criminal Justice Information Act 
is amended by adding Section 16 as follows:
    
(20 ILCS 3930/16 new)
    
Sec. 16. 
Illinois Integrated Justice System Implementation 
Board; abolition. 
The General Assembly finds that the Illinois 
Integrated Justice System Implementation Board, created by 
Executive Order 2003-16 and codified as Sections 1760.100 
through 1760.600 in Title 2 of the Illinois Administrative 
Code, has failed to fulfill its mandate and is no longer 
active, specifically: no meetings of the Board have been held 
since 2004, the Board last filed a report of its activities (as 
required by Executive Order 2003-16) in 2004, and that no 
appointments have been made to the Board for an indeterminate 
period of time and the only currently named Board members 
reported by the Legislative Research Unit are ex-officio 
members. Therefore, the Illinois Integrated Justice System 
Implementation Board is abolished, and Sections 1760.100 
through 1760.600 in Title 2 of the Illinois Administrative Code 
are repealed and without effect on and after the effective date 
of this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly.
    
Section 15. 
The Unified Code of Corrections is amended  by 
changing Section 5-8-8 and by adding Section 5-8-9 as follows:
    
(730 ILCS 5/5-8-8)
    
(Section scheduled to be repealed on December 31, 2020)
    
Sec. 5-8-8. 
Illinois Sentencing Policy Advisory Council.
    
(a) Creation.  There is created under the jurisdiction of 
the Governor the Illinois Sentencing Policy Advisory Council, 
hereinafter referred to as the Council.
    
(b)  Purposes and goals.  The purpose of the Council is to 
review sentencing policies and practices and examine how these 
policies and practices impact the criminal justice system as a 
whole in the State of Illinois.

In carrying out its duties, the 
Council shall be mindful of and aim to achieve the purposes of

sentencing in Illinois, which are set out in Section 1-1-2 of 
this Code:
    
    
(1) prescribe sanctions proportionate to the 
seriousness of the offenses and permit the recognition of 
differences in rehabilitation possibilities among 
individual offenders;
    
    
(2) forbid and prevent the commission of offenses;
    
    
(3) prevent arbitrary or oppressive treatment of 
persons adjudicated offenders or delinquents; and
    
    
(4) restore offenders to useful citizenship.
    
(c) Council composition.
    
    
(1) The Council shall consist of the following members:
    
    
    
(A) the President of the Senate, or his or her 
designee;
    
    
    
(B) the Minority Leader of the Senate, or his or 
her designee;
    
    
    
(C) the Speaker of the House, or his or her 
designee;
    
    
    
(D) the Minority Leader of the House, or his or her 
designee;
    
    
    
(E) the Governor, or his or her designee;
    
    
    
(F) the Attorney General, or his or her designee;
    
    
    
(G) two retired judges, who may have been circuit, 
appellate, or supreme court judges; retired judges 
shall be selected by the members of the Council 
designated in clauses (c)(1)(A) through (L); 
    
    
    
(G-5)  (blank); 
    
    
    
(H) the Cook County State's Attorney, or his or her 
designee;
    
    
    
(I) the Cook County Public Defender, or his or her 
designee;
    
    
    
(J) a State's Attorney not from Cook County, 
appointed by the State's Attorney's
Appellate 
Prosecutor;
    
    
    
(K) the State Appellate Defender, or his or her 
designee;
    
    
    
(L) the Director of the Administrative Office of 
the Illinois Courts, or his or her designee; 
    
    
    
(M) a victim of a violent felony or a 
representative of a crime victims' organization,

selected by the members of the Council designated in 
clauses (c)(1)(A) through (L);
    
    
    
(N) a representative of a community-based 
organization, selected by the members of
the Council 
designated in clauses (c)(1)(A) through (L);
    
    
    
(O) a criminal justice academic researcher, to be 
selected by the members of the
Council designated in 
clauses (c)(1)(A) through (L);
    
    
    
(P) a representative of law enforcement from a unit 
of local government to be
selected by the members of 
the Council designated in clauses (c)(1)(A) through 
(L);
    
    
    
(Q) a sheriff selected by the members of the 
Council designated in clauses (c)(1)(A) through (L); 
and 
    
    
    
(R) ex-officio members shall include:
    
    
    
    
(i) the Director of Corrections, or his or her 
designee;
    
    
    
    
(ii) the Chair of the Prisoner Review Board, or 
his or her designee;
    
    
    
    
(iii) the Director of the Illinois State 
Police, or his or her designee; and 
    
    
    
    
(iv) the Director of the Illinois Criminal 
Justice Information Authority, or his
or her 
designee.
    
    
(1.5) The Chair and Vice Chair shall be elected from 
among its members by a majority of the members of the 
Council.
    
    
(2) Members of the Council who serve because of their 
public office or position, or those who are designated as 
members by such officials, shall serve only as long as they 
hold such office or position.
    
    
(3) Council members shall serve without compensation 
but shall be reimbursed for travel and per diem expenses 
incurred in their work for the Council.
    
    
(4)  The Council may exercise any power, perform any 
function, take any action, or do anything in furtherance of 
its purposes and goals

upon the appointment of a quorum of 
its members. The term of office of each member of the 
Council ends on the date of repeal of this amendatory Act 
of the 96th General Assembly. 
    
(d) Duties.  The Council shall perform, as resources permit, 
duties including:
    
    
(1) Collect and analyze information including 
sentencing data, crime trends, and existing correctional 
resources to support legislative and executive action 
affecting the use of correctional resources on the State 
and local levels.
    
    
(1.5) To provide administrative support to the 
Illinois State Criminal Justice Data, Research, and 
Implementation Committee established in Section 5-8-9 of 
this Code.
 
    
    
(2) Prepare criminal justice population projections 
annually, including correctional and community-based 
supervision populations.
    
    
(3) Analyze data relevant to proposed sentencing 
legislation and its effect on current policies or 
practices, and provide information to support 
evidence-based sentencing.
    
    
(4) Ensure that adequate resources and facilities are 
available for carrying out sentences imposed on offenders 
and that rational priorities are established for the use of 
those resources. To do so, the Council shall prepare 
criminal justice resource statements, identifying the 
fiscal and practical effects of proposed criminal 
sentencing legislation, including, but not limited to, the 
correctional population, court processes, and county or 
local government resources.
    
    
(5) Perform such other studies or tasks pertaining to 
sentencing policies as may be requested by the Governor or 
the Illinois General Assembly.
    
    
(6) Perform such other functions as may be required by 
law or as are necessary to carry out the purposes and goals 
of the Council prescribed in subsection (b).
    
    
(7) Publish a report on the trends in sentencing for 
offenders described in subsection (b-1) of Section 5-4-1 of 
this Code, the impact of the trends on the prison and 
probation populations, and any changes in the racial 
composition of the prison and probation populations that 
can be attributed to the changes made by adding   subsection 
(b-1) of Section 5-4-1 to this Code by 
Public Act 99-861
 
this amendatory Act of the 99th General Assembly
.
    
(e) Authority.
    
    
(1) The Council shall have the power to perform the 
functions necessary to carry out its duties, purposes and 
goals under this Act. In so doing, the Council shall 
utilize information and analysis developed by the Illinois 
Criminal Justice Information Authority, the Administrative 
Office of the Illinois Courts, and the Illinois Department 
of Corrections.
    
    
(2) Upon request from the Council, each executive 
agency and department of State and local government shall 
provide information and records to the Council in the 
execution of its duties.
    
(f) Report.  The Council shall report in writing annually to 
the General Assembly, the Illinois Supreme Court, and  the 
Governor.
    
(g)  This Section is repealed on December 31, 2020. 


(Source: P.A. 98-65, eff. 7-15-13; 99-101, eff. 7-22-15; 
99-533, eff. 7-8-16; 99-861, eff. 1-1-17; revised 9-6-16.)
    
(730 ILCS 5/5-8-9 new)
    
Sec. 5-8-9. 
Illinois State Criminal Justice Data, 
Research, and Implementation Committee.
    
(a) The General Assembly acknowledges that State criminal 
justice agencies need to collect and analyze data and to 
evaluate programming so that these agencies can help policy 
makers determine that efforts to control crime and reduce 
victimization are effective. The General Assembly believes 
that an advisory group should be created to ensure that State 
criminal justice agencies have access to the data needed and 
capacities required to analyze criminal justice trends and 
evaluate programming.
    
(b) The Illinois State Criminal Justice Data, Research, and 
Implementation Advisory Committee is hereby created.
The 
Committee shall:
    
    
(1) examine existing State and local criminal justice 
data collection systems and assess agencies' capacities to 
effectively analyze data and evaluate criminal justice 
trends and programming based on national best practices; 
and
    
    
(2) publish an annual report, detailing its findings 
and recommendations to the General Assembly and the 
Governor.
    
(c) The Committee shall consist of the following members:
    
    
(1) the Executive Director of the Sentencing Policy 
Advisory Council, who shall serve as co-chairperson;
    
    
(2) the Associate Research Director of the Research & 
Analysis Unit and the Illinois Statistical Analysis Center 
at the Illinois Criminal Justice Information Authority, 
who shall serve as co-chair person;
    
    
(3)
the Director of State Police, or his or her 
designee;
    
    
(4) the Director of Corrections, or his or her 
designee;
    
    
(5)  the Director of Juvenile Justice, or his or her 
designee;
    
    
(6) the Director of the Prisoner Review Board, or his 
or her designee;
    
    
(7) the Director of the Department of Innovation and 
Technology, or his or her designee;
    
    
(8) the Director of the Administrative Office of the 
Illinois Courts, or his or her designee;
    
    
(9) 2  researchers that have experience working with 
administrative data appointed by the co-chairs of the 
Committee;
    
    
(10) a member of the House of Representative appointed 
by the Speaker of the House of Representatives and a member 
of the Senate appointed by the President of the Senate, one 
of whom shall serve as co-chairperson;
    
    
(11) a member of the Senate appointed by the Minority 
Leader of the Senate; and
    
    
(12) a member of the House of Representatives appointed 
by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives;
    
(d) Administrative support for the Committee shall be 
provided by the Illinois Sentencing Policy Advisory Council.
    
(e) Each department, agency, board, or authority of the 
State or any unit of local government shall provide records or 
other information to the Committee as requested by the 
Committee to carry out its duties, provided that the Committee 
and provider of the information shall make appropriate 
arrangements to ensure that the Committee and provider of the 
information to the Committee does not violate any applicable 
laws.

  


