
  

  

 
 
40 ILCS 5/3-109
  
from Ch. 108 1/2, par. 3-109
 

 
    
Amends the Downstate Police Article of the Illinois Pension Code. 
Provides that a chief of police who has voluntarily entered into an 
irrevocable agreement with a municipality to not participate in that 
municipality's pension fund is not eligible to participate in that 
municipality's pension fund. Effective immediately.

  

  

  
    
AN ACT concerning public employee benefits.

  
    
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois,
 
represented in the General Assembly:

  

 
    
Section 5. 
The Illinois Pension Code is amended  by changing 
Section 3-109 as follows:






    
(40 ILCS 5/3-109)
  
(from Ch. 108 1/2, par. 3-109)






    
Sec. 3-109. 
Persons excluded. 


    
(a) The following persons shall not be eligible to 
participate in a fund
created under this Article:




    
    
(1) part-time police officers, special police 
officers, night watchmen,
temporary employees, traffic 
guards or so-called auxiliary police officers
specially 
appointed to aid or direct traffic at or near schools or 
public
functions, or to aid in civil defense, municipal 
parking lot attendants,
clerks or other civilian employees 
of a police department who perform
clerical duties 
exclusively;




    
    
(2) any police officer who fails to pay the 
contributions required
under Section 3-125.1, computed (i) 
for funds established prior to August
5, 1963, from the 
date the municipality established the fund or the date of
a 
police officer's first appointment (including an 
appointment on probation),
whichever is later, or (ii) for 
funds established after August 5, 1963,
from the date, as 
determined from the statistics or census provided in

Section 3-103, the municipality became subject to this 
Article by attaining
the minimum population or by 
referendum, or the date of a police officer's
first 
appointment (including an appointment on probation), 
whichever is
later, and continuing during his or her entire 
service as a police officer; and




    
    
(3) any person who has elected under Section 3-109.1 to 
participate in
the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund 
rather than in a fund established
under this Article, 
without regard to whether the person continues to be

employed as chief of police or is employed in some other 
rank or capacity
within the police department, unless the 
person has lawfully rescinded that
election.


    
(a-5) A chief of police who has voluntarily entered into an 
irrevocable                                                                                                                              agreement with a municipality to not participate in 
that municipality's pension fund under this Article is not 
eligible to participate in that municipality's pension fund.
 
    
(b) A police officer who is reappointed shall, before being 
declared
eligible to participate in the pension fund, repay to 
the fund as required
by Section 3-124 any refund received 
thereunder.


    
(c) Any person otherwise qualified to participate who was

excluded from participation by reason of the age restriction 
removed by
Public Act 79-1165 may elect to participate by 
making a written application
to the Board before January 1, 
1990.  Persons so electing shall begin
participation on the 
first day of the month following the date of
application.  Such 
persons may also elect to establish creditable service
for 
periods of employment as a police officer during which they did 
not
participate by paying into the police pension fund, before 
January 1, 1990,
the amount that the person would have 
contributed had deductions from
salary been made for such 
purpose at the time such service was rendered,
together with 
interest thereon at 6% per annum from the time such service
was 
rendered until the date the payment is made.


    
(d) A person otherwise qualified to participate who was 
excluded from
participation by reason of the fitness 
requirement removed by this amendatory
Act of 1995 may elect to 
participate by making a written application to the
Board before 
July 1, 1996.  Persons so electing shall begin participation on

the first day of the month following the month in which the 
application is
received by the Board.  These persons may also 
elect to establish creditable
service for periods of employment 
as a police officer during which they did not
participate by 
paying into the police pension fund, before January 1, 1997, 
the
amount that the person would have contributed had 
deductions from salary been
made for this purpose at the time 
the service was rendered, together with
interest thereon at 6% 
per annum, compounded annually, from the time the
service was 
rendered until the date of payment.


    
(e) A person employed by the Village of Shiloh who is 
otherwise qualified to participate and was excluded from

participation by reason of his or her failure to make written 
application to the Board within 3 months after receiving his or 
her first appointment or reappointment as required under 
Section 3-106 may elect to participate by making a written 
application to the
Board before July 1, 2008.  Persons so 
electing shall begin participation on
the first day of the 
month following the month in which the application is
received 
by the Board.  These persons may also elect to establish 
creditable
service for periods of employment as a police 
officer during which they did not
participate by paying into 
the police pension fund, before January 1, 2009, the
amount 
that the person would have contributed had deductions from 
salary been
made for this purpose at the time the service was 
rendered, together with
interest thereon at 6% per annum, 
compounded annually, from the time the
service was rendered 
until the date of payment. The Village of Shiloh must pay to 
the System the corresponding employer contributions, plus 
interest.

    
(f) A person who has entered into a personal services 
contract to perform police duties for the Village of 
Bartonville on or before the effective date of this amendatory 
Act of the 96th General Assembly may be appointed as an officer 
in the Village of Bartonville within 6 months after the 
effective date of this amendatory Act,  but shall be excluded 
from participating under this Article. 
    
(g) A person employed by the Village of Glen Carbon who is 
otherwise qualified to participate and was excluded from

participation by reason of his or her failure to make written 
application to the Board within 3 months after receiving his or 
her first appointment or reappointment as required under 
Section 3-106 may elect to participate by making a written 
application to the
Board before January 1, 2011.  Persons so 
electing shall begin participation on
the first day of the 
month following the month in which the application is
received 
by the Board.  These persons may also elect to establish 
creditable
service for periods of employment as a police 
officer during which they did not
participate by paying into 
the police pension fund, before July 1, 2011, (i) employee 
contributions that the person would have contributed had 
deductions from salary been
made for this purpose at the time 
the service was rendered, (ii) employer contributions that the 
employer would have contributed had deductions from salary been

made for this purpose at the time the service was rendered, 
plus (iii) interest on items (i) and (ii) at the actuarially 
assumed interest rate, compounded annually, from the time the

service was rendered until the date of payment. 
(Source: P.A. 95-483, eff. 8-28-07; 96-775, eff. 8-28-09; 
96-1252, eff. 7-23-10.)



 
    
Section 99. 
Effective date. 
This Act takes effect upon 
becoming law.
 

  


