
  

  

 
 
20 ILCS 1605/2
  
from Ch. 120, par. 1152
 
20 ILCS 1605/9.1
 
20 ILCS 1605/20
  
from Ch. 120, par. 1170
 
20 ILCS 1605/21.10 new
 
20 ILCS 3930/9.1
 

 
    
Amends the Illinois Lottery Law. Requires the Department of the 
Lottery, beginning on January 1, 2018 or as soon thereafter as is 
practical, to offer a special instant scratch-off game to benefit State 
police memorials. Requires the net revenue from that game to be deposited 
into the Criminal Justice Information Projects Fund. Provides that moneys 
received from the scratch-off game shall be divided equally for 
distribution into the Chicago Police Memorial Foundation Fund, the Police 
Memorial Committee Fund, and the Illinois State Police Memorial Fund. 
Moneys received under this Section shall be used to fund grants for 
building and maintaining memorials and parks; holding annual memorial 
commemorations; giving scholarships to children of officers killed or 
catastrophically injured in the line of duty, or those interested in 
pursuing a career in law enforcement; and providing financial assistance to 
police officers and their families when a police officer is killed or 
injured in the line of duty. Authorizes the Department to adopt rules 
necessary to implement and administer the game. Defines "net revenue". 
Amends the Illinois Criminal Justice Act to make conforming changes. 
Effective immediately.

  

  

  
    
AN ACT concerning State government.

  
    
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois,
 
represented in the General Assembly:

  

 
    
Section 5. 
The Illinois Lottery Law is amended  by changing 
Sections 2, 9.1, and 20 and  by adding Section 21.10 as follows:




    
(20 ILCS 1605/2)
  
(from Ch. 120, par. 1152)




    
Sec. 2. 
This Act is enacted to implement and establish 
within the State
a lottery to be conducted by the State through 
the Department. The entire net proceeds of the Lottery
are to 
be used for the support of the State's Common School Fund,

except as provided in subsection (o) of Section 9.1 and 
Sections 21.2, 21.5, 21.6, 21.7, 21.8, 
and
 21.9
, and 21.10
. The 
General Assembly finds that it is in the public interest for 
the Department to conduct the functions of the Lottery with the 
assistance of a private manager under a management agreement 
overseen by the Department.  The Department shall be accountable 
to the General Assembly and the people of the State through a 
comprehensive system of regulation, audits, reports, and 
enduring operational oversight.  The Department's ongoing 
conduct of the Lottery through a management agreement with a 
private manager shall act to promote and ensure the integrity, 
security, honesty, and fairness of the Lottery's operation and 
administration.  It is the intent of the General Assembly that 
the Department shall conduct the Lottery with the assistance of 
a private manager under a management agreement at all times in 
a manner consistent with 18 U.S.C. 1307(a)(1), 1307(b)(1), 
1953(b)(4). 


(Source: P.A. 98-649, eff. 6-16-14.)


    
(20 ILCS 1605/9.1)
    
Sec. 9.1. 
Private manager and management agreement.
    
(a) As used in this Section:
    
"Offeror" means a person or group of persons that responds 
to a request for qualifications under this Section.
    
"Request for qualifications" means all materials and 
documents prepared by the Department to solicit the following 
from offerors:
    
    
(1) Statements of qualifications.
    
    
(2) Proposals to enter into a management agreement, 
including the identity of any prospective vendor or vendors 
that the offeror intends to initially engage to assist the 
offeror in performing its obligations under the management 
agreement.
    
"Final offer" means the last proposal submitted by an 
offeror in response to the request for qualifications, 
including the identity of any prospective vendor or vendors 
that the offeror intends to initially engage to assist the 
offeror in performing its obligations under the management 
agreement. 
    
"Final offeror" means the offeror ultimately selected by 
the Governor to be the private manager for the Lottery under 
subsection (h) of this Section.
    
(b) By September 15, 2010, the Governor shall select a 
private manager for the total management of the Lottery with 
integrated functions, such as lottery game design, supply of 
goods and services, and advertising and as specified in this 
Section.
    
(c) Pursuant to the terms of this subsection, the 
Department shall endeavor to expeditiously terminate the 
existing contracts in support of the Lottery in effect on the 
effective date of this amendatory Act of the 96th General 
Assembly in connection with the selection of the private 
manager.  As part of its obligation to terminate these contracts 
and select the private manager, the Department shall establish 
a mutually agreeable timetable to transfer the functions of 
existing contractors to the private manager so that existing 
Lottery operations are not materially diminished or impaired 
during the transition.  To that end, the Department shall do the 
following:
    
    
(1) where such contracts contain a provision 
authorizing termination upon notice, the Department shall 
provide notice of termination to occur upon the mutually 
agreed timetable for transfer of functions;
    
    
(2) upon the expiration of any initial term or renewal 
term of the current Lottery  contracts, the Department shall 
not renew such contract for a term extending beyond the 
mutually agreed timetable for transfer of functions; or
    
    
(3) in the event any current contract provides for 
termination of that contract upon the implementation of a 
contract with the private manager, the Department shall 
perform all necessary actions to terminate the contract on 
the date that coincides with the mutually agreed timetable 
for transfer of functions.
    
If the contracts to support the current operation of the 
Lottery in effect on the effective date of this amendatory Act 
of the 96th General Assembly are not subject to termination as 
provided for in this subsection (c), then the Department may 
include a provision in the contract with the private manager 
specifying a mutually agreeable methodology for incorporation.
    
(c-5) The Department shall include provisions in the 
management agreement whereby the private manager shall, for a 
fee, and pursuant to a contract negotiated with the Department 
(the "Employee Use Contract"), utilize the services of current 
Department employees to assist in the administration and 
operation of the Lottery.  The Department shall be the employer 
of all such bargaining unit employees assigned to perform such 
work for the private manager, and such employees shall be State 
employees, as defined by the Personnel Code.  Department 
employees shall operate under the same employment policies, 
rules, regulations, and procedures, as other employees of the 
Department.  In addition, neither historical representation 
rights under the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act, nor 
existing collective bargaining agreements, shall be disturbed 
by the management agreement with the private manager for the 
management of the Lottery. 
    
(d) The management agreement with the private manager shall 
include all of the following:
    
    
(1) A term not to exceed 10 years, including any 
renewals.
    
    
(2) A provision specifying that the Department:
    
    
    
(A) shall exercise actual control over all 
significant business decisions; 
    
    
    
(A-5) has the authority to direct or countermand 
operating decisions by the private manager at any time;
    
    
    
(B) has ready access at any time to information 
regarding Lottery operations;
    
    
    
(C) has the right to demand and receive information 
from the private manager concerning any aspect of the 
Lottery operations at any time; and
    
    
    
(D) retains ownership of all trade names, 
trademarks, and intellectual property associated with 
the Lottery.
    
    
(3) A provision imposing an affirmative duty on the 
private manager to provide the Department with material 
information and with any information the private manager 
reasonably believes the Department would want to know to 
enable the Department to conduct the Lottery.
    
    
(4) A provision requiring the private manager to 
provide the Department with advance notice of any operating 
decision that bears significantly on the public interest, 
including, but not limited to, decisions on the kinds of 
games to be offered to the public and decisions affecting 
the relative risk and reward of the games being offered, so 
the Department has a reasonable opportunity to evaluate and 
countermand that decision.
    
    
(5) A provision providing for compensation of the 
private manager that may consist of, among other things, a 
fee for services and a performance based bonus as 
consideration for managing the Lottery, including terms 
that may provide the private manager with an increase in 
compensation if Lottery revenues grow by a specified 
percentage in a given year.
    
    
(6) (Blank).
    
    
(7) A provision requiring the deposit of all Lottery 
proceeds to be deposited into the State Lottery Fund except 
as otherwise provided in Section 20 of this Act.
    
    
(8) A provision requiring the private manager to locate 
its principal office within the State.
    
    
(8-5) A provision encouraging that at least 20% of the 
cost of contracts entered into for goods and services by 
the private manager in connection with its management of 
the Lottery, other than contracts with sales agents or 
technical advisors, be awarded to businesses that are a 
minority owned business, a female owned business, or a 
business owned by a person with disability, as those terms 
are defined in the Business Enterprise for Minorities, 
Females, and Persons with Disabilities Act. 
    
    
(9) A requirement that so long as the private manager 
complies with all the conditions of the agreement under the 
oversight of the Department, the private manager shall have 
the following  duties and obligations with respect to the 
management of the Lottery:
    
    
    
(A) The right to use equipment and other assets 
used in the operation of the Lottery.
    
    
    
(B) The rights and obligations under contracts 
with retailers and vendors.
    
    
    
(C) The implementation of a comprehensive security 
program by the private manager.
    
    
    
(D) The implementation of a comprehensive system 
of internal audits.
    
    
    
(E) The implementation of a program by the private 
manager to curb compulsive gambling by persons playing 
the Lottery.
    
    
    
(F) A system for determining (i) the type of 
Lottery games, (ii) the method of selecting winning 
tickets, (iii) the manner of payment of prizes to 
holders of winning tickets, (iv) the frequency of 
drawings of winning tickets, (v) the method to be used 
in selling tickets, (vi) a system for verifying the 
validity of tickets claimed to be winning tickets, 
(vii) the basis upon which retailer commissions are 
established by the manager, and (viii) minimum 
payouts.
    
    
(10) A requirement that advertising and promotion must 
be consistent with Section 7.8a of this Act.
    
    
(11) A requirement that the private manager market the 
Lottery to those residents who are new, infrequent, or 
lapsed players of the Lottery, especially those who are 
most likely to make regular purchases on the Internet as 
permitted by law.
    
    
(12) A code of ethics for the private manager's 
officers and employees.
    
    
(13) A requirement that the Department monitor and 
oversee the private manager's practices and take action 
that the Department considers appropriate to ensure that 
the private manager is in compliance with the terms of the 
management agreement, while allowing the manager, unless 
specifically prohibited by law or the management 
agreement, to negotiate and sign its own contracts with 
vendors.
    
    
(14) A provision requiring the private manager to 
periodically file, at least on an annual basis, appropriate 
financial statements in a form and manner acceptable to the 
Department.
    
    
(15) Cash reserves requirements.
    
    
(16) Procedural requirements for obtaining the prior 
approval of the Department when a management agreement or 
an interest in a management agreement is sold, assigned, 
transferred, or pledged as collateral to secure financing.
    
    
(17) Grounds for the termination of the management 
agreement by the Department or the private manager.
    
    
(18) Procedures for amendment of the agreement.
    
    
(19) A provision requiring the private manager to 
engage in an open and competitive bidding process for any 
procurement having a cost in excess of $50,000 that is not 
a part of the private manager's final offer.  The process 
shall favor the selection of a vendor deemed to have 
submitted a proposal that provides the Lottery with the 
best overall value.  The process shall not be subject to the 
provisions of the Illinois Procurement Code, unless 
specifically required by the management agreement.
    
    
(20)  The transition of rights and obligations, 
including any associated equipment or other assets used in 
the operation of the Lottery, from the manager to any 
successor manager of the lottery, including the 
Department, following the termination of or foreclosure 
upon the management agreement.
    
    
(21) Right of use of copyrights, trademarks, and 
service marks held by the Department in the name of the 
State.  The agreement must provide that any use of them by 
the manager shall only be for the purpose of fulfilling its 
obligations under the management agreement during the term 
of the agreement.
    
    
(22) The disclosure of any information requested by the 
Department to enable it to comply with the reporting 
requirements and information requests provided for under 
subsection (p) of this Section. 
    
(e) Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, the 
Department shall select a private manager through a competitive 
request for qualifications process consistent with Section 
20-35 of the Illinois Procurement Code, which shall take into 
account:
    
    
(1) the offeror's ability to market the Lottery to 
those residents who are new, infrequent, or lapsed players 
of the Lottery, especially those who are most likely to 
make regular purchases on the Internet;
    
    
(2) the offeror's ability to address the State's 
concern with the social effects of gambling on those who 
can least afford to do so;
    
    
(3) the offeror's ability to provide the most 
successful management of the Lottery for the benefit of the 
people of the State based on current and past business 
practices or plans of the offeror; and
    
    
(4) the offeror's poor or inadequate  past performance 
in servicing, equipping, operating or  managing a lottery on 
behalf of Illinois, another State or foreign government and 
attracting persons who are not currently regular players of 
a lottery.
    
(f) The Department may retain the services of an advisor or 
advisors with significant experience in financial services or 
the management, operation, and procurement of goods, services, 
and equipment for a government-run lottery to assist in the 
preparation of the terms of the request for qualifications and 
selection of the private manager. Any prospective advisor 
seeking to provide services under this subsection (f) shall 
disclose any material business or financial relationship 
during the past 3 years with any potential offeror, or with a 
contractor or subcontractor presently providing goods, 
services, or equipment to the Department to support the 
Lottery.  The Department shall evaluate the material business or 
financial relationship of each prospective advisor.  The 
Department shall not select any prospective advisor with a 
substantial business or financial relationship that the 
Department deems to impair the objectivity of the services to 
be provided by the prospective advisor. During the course of 
the advisor's engagement by the Department, and for a period of 
one year thereafter, the advisor shall not enter into any 
business or financial relationship with any offeror or any 
vendor identified to assist an offeror in performing its 
obligations under the management agreement. Any advisor 
retained by the Department shall be disqualified from being an 
offeror.

 The Department shall not include terms in the request 
for qualifications that provide a material advantage whether 
directly or indirectly to any potential offeror, or any 
contractor or subcontractor presently providing goods, 
services, or equipment to the Department to support the 
Lottery, including terms contained in previous responses to 
requests for proposals or qualifications submitted to 
Illinois, another State or foreign government when those terms 
are uniquely associated with a particular potential offeror, 
contractor, or subcontractor.  The request for proposals 
offered by the Department on December 22, 2008 as 
"LOT08GAMESYS" and reference number "22016176" is declared 
void.
    
(g) The Department shall select at least 2 offerors as 
finalists to potentially serve as the  private manager no later 
than August 9, 2010.  Upon making preliminary selections, the 
Department shall schedule a public hearing on the finalists' 
proposals  and provide public notice of the hearing at least 7 
calendar days before the hearing.  The notice must include all 
of the following:
    
    
(1) The date, time, and place of the hearing.
    
    
(2) The subject matter of the hearing.
    
    
(3) A brief description of the management agreement to 
be awarded.
    
    
(4) The identity of the offerors that have been 
selected as finalists to serve  as the private manager.
    
    
(5) The address and telephone number of the Department.
    
(h) At the public hearing, the Department shall (i) provide 
sufficient time for each finalist to present and explain its 
proposal to the Department and the Governor or the Governor's 
designee, including an opportunity to respond to questions 
posed by the Department, Governor, or designee and (ii)  allow 
the public and non-selected offerors to comment  on the 
presentations.  The Governor or a designee shall attend the 
public hearing. After the public hearing, the Department shall 
have 14 calendar days to recommend to the Governor whether a 
management agreement should be entered into with a particular 
finalist.  After reviewing the Department's recommendation, the 
Governor may accept or reject the Department's recommendation, 
and shall select a final offeror  as the private manager by 
publication of a notice in the Illinois Procurement Bulletin on 
or before September 15, 2010. The Governor shall include in the 
notice a detailed explanation and the reasons why the final  
offeror is superior to other offerors and will provide 
management services in a manner that best achieves the 
objectives of this Section. The Governor shall also sign the 
management agreement with the private manager.
    
(i) Any action to contest the private manager selected by 
the Governor under this Section must be brought within 7 
calendar days after the publication of the notice of the 
designation of the private manager as provided in subsection 
(h) of this Section.
    
(j) The Lottery shall remain, for so long as a private 
manager manages the Lottery in accordance with provisions of 
this Act, a Lottery conducted by the State, and the State shall 
not be authorized to sell or transfer the Lottery to a third 
party.
    
(k) Any tangible personal property used exclusively in 
connection with the lottery that is owned by the Department and 
leased to the private manager shall be owned by the Department 
in the name of the State and shall be considered to be public 
property devoted to an essential public and governmental 
function.
    
(l) The Department may exercise any of its powers under 
this Section or any other law as necessary or desirable for the 
execution of the Department's powers under this Section.
    
(m) Neither this Section nor any management agreement 
entered into under this Section prohibits the General Assembly 
from authorizing forms of gambling that are not in direct 
competition with the Lottery.
    
(n) The private manager shall be subject to  a complete 
investigation in the third, seventh, and tenth years of the 
agreement (if the agreement is for a 10-year term) by the 
Department in cooperation with the Auditor General to determine 
whether the private manager has complied  with this Section and 
the management agreement.  The private manager shall bear the 
cost of an investigation or reinvestigation of the private 
manager under this subsection.
    
(o) The powers conferred by this Section are in addition 
and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law.  If 
any other law or rule is inconsistent with this Section, 
including, but not limited to, provisions of the Illinois 
Procurement Code, then this Section controls as to any 
management agreement entered into under this Section. This 
Section and any rules adopted under this Section contain full 
and complete authority for a management agreement between the 
Department and a private manager.  No law, procedure, 
proceeding, publication, notice, consent, approval, order, or 
act by the Department or any other officer, Department, agency, 
or instrumentality of the State or any political subdivision is 
required for the Department to enter into a management 
agreement under this Section.  This Section contains full and 
complete authority for the Department to approve any contracts 
entered into by a private manager with a vendor providing 
goods, services, or both goods and services to the private 
manager under the terms of the management agreement, including 
subcontractors of such vendors.
    
Upon receipt of a written request from the Chief 
Procurement Officer, the Department shall provide to the Chief 
Procurement Officer a complete and un-redacted copy of the 
management agreement or any contract that is subject to the 
Department's approval authority under this subsection (o).  The 
Department shall provide a copy of the agreement or contract to 
the Chief Procurement Officer in the time specified by the 
Chief Procurement Officer in his or her written request, but no 
later than 5 business days after the request is received by the 
Department.  The Chief Procurement Officer must retain any 
portions of the management agreement or of any contract 
designated by the Department as confidential, proprietary, or 
trade secret information in complete confidence pursuant to 
subsection (g) of Section 7 of the Freedom of Information Act.  
The Department shall also provide the Chief Procurement Officer 
with reasonable advance written notice of any contract that is 
pending Department approval. 
    
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section to the 
contrary, the Chief Procurement Officer shall adopt 
administrative rules, including emergency rules, to establish 
a procurement process to select a successor private manager if 
a private management agreement has been terminated. The 
selection process shall at a minimum take into account the 
criteria set forth in items (1) through (4) of subsection (e) 
of this Section and may include provisions consistent with 
subsections (f), (g), (h), and (i) of this Section. The Chief 
Procurement Officer shall also implement and administer the 
adopted selection process upon the termination of a private 
management agreement. The Department, after the Chief 
Procurement Officer certifies that the procurement process has 
been followed in accordance with the rules adopted under this 
subsection (o), shall select a final offeror as the private 
manager and sign the management agreement with the private 
manager. 
    
Except as provided in Sections 21.2, 21.5, 21.6, 21.7, 
21.8, 
and
 21.9
, and 21.10
, the Department shall distribute all 
proceeds of lottery tickets and shares sold in the following 
priority and manner:
    
    
(1)   The payment of prizes and retailer bonuses.
    
    
(2) The payment of costs incurred in the operation and 
administration of the Lottery, including the payment of 
sums due to the private manager under the management 
agreement with the Department.
    
    
(3)   On the last day of each month or as soon thereafter 
as possible, the State Comptroller shall direct and the 
State Treasurer shall transfer from the State Lottery Fund 
to the Common School Fund an amount that is equal to the 
proceeds transferred in the corresponding month of fiscal 
year 2009, as adjusted for inflation, to the Common School 
Fund.
    
    
(4)   On or before the last day of each fiscal year, 
deposit any remaining proceeds, subject to payments under 
items (1), (2), and (3) into the Capital Projects Fund each 
fiscal year. 
    
(p) The Department shall be subject to the following 
reporting and information request requirements:
    
    
(1) the Department shall submit written quarterly 
reports to the Governor and the General Assembly on the 
activities and actions of the private manager selected 
under this Section;
    
    
(2) upon request of the Chief Procurement Officer, the 
Department shall promptly produce information related to 
the procurement activities of the Department and the 
private manager requested by the Chief Procurement 
Officer; the Chief Procurement Officer must retain 
confidential, proprietary, or trade secret information 
designated by the Department in complete confidence 
pursuant to subsection (g) of Section 7 of the Freedom of 
Information Act; and
    
    
(3) at least 30 days prior to the beginning of the 
Department's fiscal year, the Department shall prepare an 
annual written report on the activities of the private 
manager selected under this Section and deliver that report 
to the Governor and General Assembly.
(Source: P.A. 97-464, eff. 8-19-11; 98-463, eff. 8-16-13; 
98-649, eff. 6-16-14.)




    
(20 ILCS 1605/20)
  
(from Ch. 120, par. 1170)




    
Sec. 20. 
State Lottery Fund.

    
(a) There is created in the State Treasury a special fund 
to be
known as the "State Lottery Fund". Such fund shall 
consist of all revenues
received from (1) the sale of lottery 
tickets or shares, (net of
commissions, fees
representing those 
expenses that are directly proportionate to the
sale of tickets 
or shares at the agent location, and prizes of less
than
$600 
which
have been validly paid at the agent
level), (2) 
application fees,
and (3) all other sources including moneys 
credited or transferred thereto
from
any other fund
or source 
pursuant to law. Interest earnings of the State Lottery Fund

shall be credited to the Common School Fund.


    
(b) The receipt and distribution of moneys under Section 
21.5 of this Act shall be in accordance with Section 21.5.

    
(c) The receipt and distribution of moneys under Section 
21.6 of this Act shall be in accordance with Section 21.6.
    
(d) The receipt and distribution of moneys under Section 
21.7 of this Act shall be in accordance with Section 21.7.

    
(e)
 The receipt and distribution of moneys under Section 
21.8
 of this Act shall be in accordance with Section 21.8.

    
(f) The receipt and distribution of moneys under Section 
21.9 of this Act shall be in accordance with Section 21.9. 
    
(g) The receipt and distribution of moneys under Section 
21.10 of this Act shall be in accordance with Section 21.10.
 
(Source: P.A. 98-649, eff. 6-16-14.)


    
(20 ILCS 1605/21.10 new)
    
Sec. 21.10. 
Scratch-off for State police memorials.
    
 (a)  The Department shall offer a special instant 
scratch-off game for the benefit of State police memorials. The 
game shall commence on January 1, 2018 or as soon thereafter, 
at the discretion of the Director, as is reasonably practical. 
The operation of the game shall be governed by this Act and any 
rules adopted by the Department.  If any provision of this 
Section is inconsistent with any other provision of this Act, 
then this Section governs.
    
(b) The net revenue from the State police memorials 
scratch-off game shall be deposited into the Criminal Justice 
Information Projects Fund and distributed equally, as soon as 
practical but at least on a monthly basis, to the Chicago 
Police Memorial Foundation Fund, the Police Memorial Committee 
Fund, and the Illinois State Police Memorial Fund. Moneys 
transferred to the  funds under this Section shall be used, 
subject to appropriation, to fund grants for building and 
maintaining memorials and parks; holding annual memorial 
commemorations; giving scholarships to children of officers 
killed or catastrophically injured in the line of duty, or 
those interested in pursuing a career in law enforcement; and 
providing financial assistance to police officers and their 
families when a police officer is killed or injured in the line 
of duty.
    
Moneys collected from the State police memorials special 
instant scratch-off game shall be used only as a supplemental 
financial resource and shall not supplant existing moneys that 
may be appropriated under Section 9.1 of the Illinois Criminal 
Justice Act.
    
For purposes of this subsection, "net revenue" means the 
total amount for which tickets have been sold less the sum of 
the amount paid out in the prizes and the actual administrative 
expenses of the Department solely related to the scratch-off 
game under this Section.
    
(c) During the time that tickets are sold for the State 
police memorials scratch-off game, the Department shall not 
unreasonably diminish the efforts devoted to marketing any 
other instant scratch-off lottery game.
    
(d) The Department may adopt any rules necessary to 
implement and administer the provisions of this Section.
 
    
Section 10. 
The Illinois Criminal Justice Information Act 
is amended by changing Section 9.1 as follows:






    
(20 ILCS 3930/9.1)






    
Sec. 9.1. 
Criminal Justice Information Projects Fund. 
The 
Criminal
Justice Information Projects Fund is hereby created as 
a special fund in the
State Treasury.  Grants and other moneys 
obtained by the Authority from
governmental entities (other 
than the federal government), private sources, and

not-for-profit organizations for use in investigating criminal 
justice issues
or undertaking other criminal justice 
information projects
, or pursuant to the uses identified in 
Section 21.10 of the Illinois Lottery Law,
 shall be deposited

into the Fund.  Moneys in the Fund may be used by the Authority, 
subject to
appropriation, for undertaking such projects and for 
the operating and other
expenses of the Authority incidental to 
those projects. 
Any interest earned on moneys in the Fund must 
be deposited into the Fund.
 


(Source: P.A. 88-538.)



 
    
Section 99. 
Effective date. 
This Act takes effect upon 
becoming law.
 

  


