
  

  

 


40 ILCS 5/16-123
  
from Ch. 108 1/2, par. 16-123


30 ILCS 805/8.42 new

 
    
Amends the Downstate Teacher Article of the Illinois Pension Code. 
Provides that beginning on the effective date of the amendatory Act, a 
substitute teacher is not required, as a condition of employment or 
otherwise, to participate in the System. Provides that an active substitute 
teacher may terminate his or her membership in the System (including the 
ability to contribute or have contributions made to a defined contribution 
account, if applicable) by notifying the System in writing. Provides that 
an active substitute teacher terminating his or her membership in the 
System shall be entitled to a refund of his or her contributions (other 
than contributions to a defined contribution account) minus the benefits 
received prior to the termination of membership. Amends the State Mandates 
Act to require implementation without reimbursement.

  

  

  
    
AN ACT concerning public employee benefits.

  
    
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois,
 
represented in the General Assembly:

  

 
    
Section 5. 
The Illinois Pension Code is amended  by changing 
Section 16-123 as follows:






    
(40 ILCS 5/16-123)
  
(from Ch. 108 1/2, par. 16-123)






    
Sec. 16-123. 
Membership of System. 


    
(a) 
Except as provided in subsection (c), the
 
The
 
membership of this System shall be composed of all teachers

employed after June 30, 1939 who become members as a condition 
of
employment on the date they become teachers.  Membership 
shall continue
until the date a member becomes an annuitant, 
dies, accepts a single-sum
retirement benefit, accepts a 
refund, or forfeits the rights to a refund.


    
(b) This Article does not apply to any person first 
employed after June
30, 1979 as a public service employment 
program participant under the Federal
Comprehensive Employment 
and Training Act and whose wages or fringe benefits
are paid in 
whole or in part by funds provided under such Act.


    
(c) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, 
beginning on the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 
100th General Assembly, a substitute teacher is not required, 
as a condition of employment or otherwise, to participate in 
this System. An active substitute teacher may terminate his or 
her membership in this System (including the ability to 
contribute or have contributions made to a defined contribution 
account, if applicable) by notifying the System in writing. An 
active substitute teacher terminating his or her membership in 
this System under this subsection shall be entitled to a refund 
of his or her contributions (other than contributions to a 
defined contribution account) minus the benefits received 
prior to the termination of membership.
 
(Source: P.A. 87-11.)


    
Section 90. 
The State Mandates Act is amended by adding 
Section 8.42 as follows:
    
(30 ILCS 805/8.42 new)
    
Sec. 8.42. 
Exempt mandate. 
Notwithstanding Sections 6 and 8 
of this Act, no reimbursement by the State is required for the 
implementation of any mandate created by this amendatory Act of 
the 100th General Assembly.

  


