
  

  

  

  
    
AN ACT concerning State government.

  
    
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois,
 
represented in the General Assembly:

  

 
    
Section 5. 
The Children and Family Services Act is amended  
by adding Section 7.8 as follows:
    
(20 ILCS 505/7.8 new)
    
Sec. 7.8. 
Youth in care; private right of action.
    
(a) The Department shall place youth in care, as defined in 
Section 4d of this Act, in the least restrictive and most 
family-like setting that is consistent with the youth's needs 
and best interests.
    
(b) A youth in care who remains in a psychiatric hospital 
for more than 14 days beyond the time the youth was clinically 
ready for discharge or beyond medical necessity shall have a 
private right of action against the Department for failure to 
place the youth in a placement type that is consistent with the 
youth's needs and best interests as required under subsection 
(a). A youth aggrieved by any violation of this subsection (b) 
is entitled to recover damages in the amount of $600 per day 
for each day the youth remained psychiatrically hospitalized 
beyond necessity beginning on the first day after the youth was 
clinically or medically ready for discharge and continuing up 
to the date upon which the youth was eventually placed in a 
placement type that is consistent with the youth's needs and 
best interests as required under subsection (a). Placement of 
the youth in a shelter or in another type of placement that was 
not identified as an appropriate placement for the youth shall 
not relieve the Department of its liability and obligation to 
pay damages to the youth as provided under this subsection (b).
 
    
(c) A youth in care who:
    
    
(1) remains in a detention center or Department of 
Juvenile Justice facility for more  than 14 days after:
    
    
    
(A) the youth could have been released or was 
recommended to be released;
    
    
    
(B) the youth's scheduled or anticipated release 
date; or
    
    
    
(C) the youth was not presented to the Prisoner 
Review Board on the youth's scheduled hearing date for 
aftercare release because the Department did not have 
an approved placement for the youth; or
    
    
(2) remains in a detention center or Department of 
Juvenile Justice facility solely because the Department 
cannot locate an appropriate placement for the youth;
shall have a private right of action against the Department for 
failure to place the youth in a placement type that is 
consistent with the youth's needs and best interests as 
required under subsection (a). A youth aggrieved by any 
violation of this subsection (c) is entitled to recover damages 
in the amount of $600 per day for each day the youth remained 
in a detention center or Department of Juvenile Justice 
facility after the youth could have been released beginning on 
the first day after the youth could have been released and 
continuing up to the date upon which the youth was eventually 
placed in a placement type that is consistent with the youth's 
needs and best interests as required under subsection (a). 
Placement of the youth in a shelter or in another type of 
placement that was not identified as an appropriate placement 
for the youth shall not relieve the Department of its liability 
and obligation to pay damages to the youth as provided under 
this subsection (c).
    
(d) The remedies provided in this Section are in addition 
to any remedies available under local, State, or federal law.
 

  


