







    
AN ACT concerning education.


    
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois, 
represented in the General Assembly: 






 
    
Section 1. 
Short title. 
This Act may be cited as the 
Student Online Personal Protection Act.
    
Section 3. 
Legislative intent.  
Schools today are 
increasingly using a wide range of beneficial online services 
and other technologies to help students learn, but concerns 
have been raised about whether sufficient safeguards exist to 
protect the privacy and security of data about students when it 
is collected by educational technology companies.  This Act is 
intended to ensure that student data will be protected when it 
is collected by educational technology companies and that the 
data may be used for beneficial purposes such as providing 
personalized learning and innovative educational technologies.
    
Section 5. 
Definitions.  
In this Act:
    
"Covered information" means personally identifiable 
information or material or information that is linked to 
personally identifiable information or material in any media or 
format that is not publicly available and is any of the 
following:
    
    
(1) Created by or provided to an operator by a student 
or the student's parent or legal guardian in the course of 
the student's, parent's, or legal guardian's use of the 
operator's site, service, or application for K through 12 
school purposes.
    
    
(2) Created by or provided to an operator by an 
employee or agent of a  school or school district for  K 
through 12 school purposes.
    
    
(3) Gathered by an operator through the operation of 
its site, service, or application for K through 12 school 
purposes and personally identifies a student, including, 
but not limited to, information in the student's 
educational record or electronic mail, first and last name, 
home address, telephone number, electronic mail address, 
or other information that allows physical or online 
contact, discipline records, test results, special 
education data, juvenile dependency records, grades, 
evaluations, criminal records, medical records, health 
records, a social security number, biometric information, 
disabilities, socioeconomic information, food purchases, 
political affiliations, religious information, text 
messages, documents, student identifiers, search activity, 
photos, voice recordings, or geolocation information.
    
"Interactive computer service" has the meaning ascribed to 
that term in Section 230 of the federal Communications Decency 
Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. 230).
    
"K through 12 school purposes" means purposes that are 
directed by or that customarily take place at the direction of 
a school, teacher, or school district; aid in the 
administration of school activities, including, but not 
limited to, instruction in the classroom or at home, 
administrative activities, and collaboration between students, 
school personnel, or parents; or are otherwise for the use and 
benefit of the school.
    
"Operator" means, to the extent that an entity is operating 
in this capacity, the operator of an Internet website, online 
service, online application, or mobile application with actual 
knowledge that the site, service, or application is used 
primarily for K through 12 school purposes and was designed and 
marketed for K through 12 school purposes.
    
"School" means (1) any preschool, public kindergarten, 
elementary or secondary educational institution, vocational 
school, special educational facility, or any other elementary 
or secondary educational agency or institution or (2) any 
person, agency, or institution that maintains school student 
records from more than one school. "School" includes a private 
or nonpublic school.
    
"Targeted advertising" means presenting advertisements to 
a student where the advertisement is selected based on 
information obtained or inferred over time from that student's 
online behavior, usage of applications, or covered 
information. The term does not include advertising to a student 
at an online location based upon that student's current visit 
to that location or in response to that student's request for 
information or feedback, without the retention of that 
student's online activities or requests over time for the 
purpose of targeting subsequent ads.
    
Section 10. 
Operator prohibitions.
  An operator shall not 
knowingly do any of the following:
    
    
(1) Engage in targeted advertising on the operator's 
site, service, or application or target advertising on any 
other site, service, or application if the targeting of the 
advertising is based on any information, including covered 
information and persistent unique identifiers, that the 
operator has acquired because of the use of that operator's 
site, service, or application for K through 12 school 
purposes.
    
    
(2) Use information, including persistent unique 
identifiers, created or gathered by the operator's site, 
service, or application to amass a profile about a student, 
except in furtherance of  K through 12 school purposes. 
"Amass a profile" does not include the collection and 
retention of account information that remains under the 
control of the student, the student's parent or  legal 
guardian, or the school.
    
    
(3) Sell or rent a student's information, including 
covered information. This subdivision (3) does not apply to 
the purchase, merger, or other type of acquisition of an 
operator by another entity if the operator or successor 
entity complies with this Act regarding previously 
acquired student information.
    
    
(4) Except as otherwise provided in Section 20 of this 
Act, disclose covered information, unless the disclosure 
is made for the following purposes:
    
    
    
(A) In furtherance of the K through 12 school 
purposes of the site, service, or application if the 
recipient of the covered information disclosed under 
this clause (A) does not further disclose the 
information, unless done to allow or improve 
operability and functionality of the operator's site, 
service, or application.
    
    
    
(B) To ensure legal and regulatory compliance or 
take precautions
against liability.
    
    
    
(C) To respond to the judicial process.
    
    
    
(D) To protect the safety or integrity of users of 
the site or others or the security of the site, 
service, or application.
    
    
    
(E) For a school, educational, or employment 
purpose requested by the student or the student's 
parent or legal guardian, provided that the 
information is not used or further disclosed for any 
other purpose.
    
    
    
(F) To a third party if the operator contractually 
prohibits the third party from using any covered 
information for any purpose other than providing the 
contracted service to or on behalf of the operator, 
prohibits the third party from disclosing any covered 
information provided by the operator with subsequent 
third parties, and requires the third party to 
implement and maintain reasonable security procedures 
and practices.
    
Nothing in this Section prohibits the operator's use of 
information for maintaining, developing, supporting, 
improving, or diagnosing the operator's site, service, or 
application.
    
Section 15. 
Operator duties.  
An operator shall do the 
following:
    
    
(1) Implement and maintain reasonable security 
procedures and practices appropriate to the nature of the 
covered information and designed to protect that covered 
information from unauthorized access, destruction, use, 
modification, or disclosure.
    
    
(2) Delete, within a reasonable time period, a 
student's covered information if the school or school 
district requests deletion of covered information under 
the control of the school or school district, unless a 
student or his or her parent or legal guardian consents to 
the maintenance of the covered information.
    
    
(3) Publicly disclose material information about its 
collection, use, and disclosure of covered information, 
including, but not limited to, publishing a terms of 
service agreement, privacy policy, or similar document.
    
Section 20. 
Permissive use or disclosure.  
    
(a) An operator may use or disclose covered information of 
a student under the following circumstances:
    
    
(1) If other provisions of federal or State law require 
the operator to disclose the information, and the operator 
complies with the requirements of federal and State law in 
protecting and disclosing that information.
    
    
(2) For legitimate research purposes as required by 
State or federal law and subject to the restrictions under 
applicable State and federal law or as allowed by State or 
federal law and under the direction of a  school, school 
district, or the State Board of Education if the covered 
information is not used for advertising or to amass a 
profile on the student for purposes other than for K 
through 12 school purposes.
    
    
(3) To a State or local educational agency, including  
schools and school districts, for K through 12 school 
purposes, as permitted by State or federal law.
    
    
(4) For the purpose of identifying or displaying 
information to the student about or facilitating the 
connection of the student with a not-for-profit 
institution of higher education or a scholarship 
opportunity. Information under this paragraph (4) may be 
disclosed only if the operator has first obtained the 
express written consent of the student's parent or legal 
guardian or, if the student is 18 years old or older or is 
an emancipated minor, the student. For the purposes of this 
paragraph (4), express written consent may be obtained as a 
response to the annual notice required under 34 CFR 99.7 
and is not required to be in addition to consent given in 
response to that annual notice.
    
If the operator is a national assessment provider and the 
student's covered information is not being collected or used 
for K through 12 school purposes but is collected and used for 
a college entrance exam, the national assessment provider may, 
in response to a request directly from the student who owns the 
covered information and upon securing the express written 
consent of the student or the student's parent or legal 
guardian given in response to clear and conspicuous notice, use 
or disclose covered information solely to provide the student 
with access to employment opportunities, educational 
scholarships, financial aid, or postsecondary educational 
opportunities.
    
(b) A school may use or disclose covered information of a 
student for the purpose of identifying or displaying 
information to the student about or facilitating the connection 
of the student with a not-for-profit institution of higher 
education or a scholarship opportunity. Information under this 
subsection (b) may be disclosed only if the operator has first 
obtained the express written consent of the student's parent or 
legal guardian or, if the student is 18 years old or older or 
is an emancipated minor, the student. For the purposes of this 
subsection (b), express written consent may be obtained as a 
response to the annual notice required under 34 CFR 99.7 and is 
not required to be in addition to consent given in response to 
that annual notice.
    
Section 25. 
Operator actions that are not prohibited.  
This 
Act does not prohibit an operator from doing any of the 
following:
    
    
(1) Using covered information to improve educational 
products if that information is not associated with an 
identified student within the operator's site, service, or 
application or other sites, services, or applications 
owned by the operator.
    
    
(2) Using covered information that is not associated 
with an identified student to demonstrate the 
effectiveness of the operator's products or services, 
including in their marketing.
    
    
(3) Sharing covered information that is not associated 
with an identified student for the development and 
improvement of educational sites, services, or 
applications.
    
    
(4) Using recommendation engines to recommend to a 
student either of the following:
    
    
    
(A) Additional content relating to an educational, 
other learning, or employment opportunity purpose 
within an online site, service, or application if the 
recommendation is not determined in whole or in part by 
payment or other consideration from a third party.
    
    
    
(B) Additional services relating to an 
educational, other learning, or employment opportunity 
purpose within an online site, service, or application 
if the recommendation is not determined in whole or in 
part by payment or other consideration from a third 
party.
    
    
(5) Responding to a student's request for information 
or for feedback without the information or response being 
determined in whole or in part by payment or other 
consideration from a third party.
    
Section 30. 
Applicability.  
This Act does not do any of the 
following:
    
    
(1) Limit the authority of a law enforcement agency to 
obtain any content or information from an operator as 
authorized by law or under a court order.
    
    
(2) Limit the ability of an operator to use student 
data, including covered information, for adaptive learning 
or customized student learning purposes.
    
    
(3) Apply to general audience Internet websites, 
general audience online services, general audience online 
applications, or general audience mobile applications, 
even if login credentials created for an operator's site, 
service, or application may be used to access those general 
audience sites, services, or applications.
    
    
(4) Limit service providers from providing Internet 
connectivity to schools or students and their families.
    
    
(5) Prohibit an operator of an Internet website, online 
service, online application, or mobile application from 
marketing educational products directly to parents if the 
marketing did not result from the use of covered 
information obtained by the operator through the provision 
of services covered under this Act.
    
    
(6) Impose a duty upon a provider of an electronic 
store, gateway, marketplace, or other means of purchasing 
or downloading software or applications to review or 
enforce compliance with this Act on those applications or 
software.
    
    
(7) Impose a duty upon a provider of an interactive 
computer service to review or enforce compliance with this 
Act by third-party content providers.
    
    
(8) Prohibit students from downloading, exporting, 
transferring, saving, or maintaining their own student 
data or documents.
    
    
(9) Supersede the federal Family Educational Rights 
and Privacy Act of 1974 or rules adopted pursuant to that 
Act or the Illinois School Student Records Act.
    
Section 35. 
Enforcement.  
Violations of this Act shall 
constitute unlawful practices for which the Attorney General 
may take appropriate action under the Consumer Fraud and 
Deceptive Business Practices Act. 
    
Section 40. 
Severability. 
The provisions of this Act are 
severable under Section 1.31 of the Statute on Statutes.
    
Section 50. 
The Consumer Fraud and Deceptive Business 
Practices Act is amended by changing Section 2Z as follows:






    
(815 ILCS 505/2Z)
  
(from Ch. 121 1/2, par. 262Z)




    
Sec. 2Z. 
Violations of other Acts. 
Any person who knowingly 
violates
the Automotive Repair Act, the Automotive Collision 
Repair Act,
the Home Repair and Remodeling Act,
the Dance 
Studio Act,
the Physical Fitness Services Act,
the Hearing 
Instrument Consumer Protection Act,
the Illinois Union Label 
Act,
the Job Referral and Job Listing Services Consumer 
Protection Act,
the Travel Promotion Consumer Protection Act,

the Credit Services Organizations Act,
the Automatic Telephone 
Dialers Act,
the Pay-Per-Call Services Consumer Protection 
Act,
the Telephone Solicitations Act,
the Illinois Funeral or 
Burial Funds Act,
the Cemetery Oversight Act, the Cemetery Care 
Act,
the Safe and Hygienic Bed Act,
the Pre-Need Cemetery Sales 
Act,
the High Risk Home Loan Act,  the Payday Loan Reform Act, 
the Mortgage Rescue Fraud Act, subsection (a) or (b) of Section 
3-10 of the
Cigarette Tax Act, subsection
(a) or (b) of Section 
3-10 of the Cigarette Use Tax Act, the Electronic
Mail Act, the 
Internet Caller Identification Act, paragraph (6)
of

subsection (k) of Section 6-305 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 
Section 11-1431, 18d-115, 18d-120, 18d-125, 18d-135,  18d-150, 
or 18d-153 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Article 3 of the 
Residential Real Property Disclosure Act,  the Automatic 
Contract Renewal Act, the Reverse Mortgage Act, Section 25 of 
the Youth Mental Health Protection Act, 
or
 the Personal 
Information Protection Act
, or the Student Online Personal 
Protection Act
 commits an unlawful practice within the meaning 
of this Act.


(Source: P.A. 99-331, eff. 1-1-16; 99-411, eff. 1-1-16; 99-642, 
eff. 7-28-16.)
    
Section 99. 
Effective date. 
This Act takes effect upon 
becoming law.
