
  

  

 
20 ILCS 1305/10-75 new

 
    
Amends the Department of Human Services Act. Provides that a person is 
eligible for a diaper allowance of $80 per month per child if the person's 
household income is at or below 50% of the federal poverty guidelines, the 
person is responsible for the welfare of a child 3 years of age or younger, 
and the person receives medical assistance under the Illinois Public Aid 
Code. Provides that the diaper allowance may be used only  to purchase 
diapers and shall be issued through an electronic benefit transfer card. 
Provides that the diaper allowance is not considered income for purposes of 
determining eligibility for medical assistance under the Illinois Public 
Aid Code or for any other public aid benefits provided under State law. 
Effective October 1, 2018.

  

  

  
    
AN ACT concerning State government.

  
    
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois,
 
represented in the General Assembly:

  

 
    
Section 5. 
The Department of Human Services Act is amended  
by adding Section 10-75 as follows:
    
(20 ILCS 1305/10-75 new)
    
Sec. 10-75. 
Diaper allowance.
    
(a) Commencing October 1, 2018, a person whose household 
income is at or below 50% of the federal poverty guidelines and 
who is the person responsible for the welfare of a child 3 
years of age or younger and who is receiving medical assistance 
under Article V of the Illinois Public Aid Code shall be 
eligible for a diaper allowance in the amount of $80 per month 
per child. The diaper allowance may only be used to purchase 
diapers.
    
(b) The diaper allowance shall be issued through an 
electronic benefit transfer card.
 
    
(c) The diaper allowance shall not be considered income for 
purposes of determining eligibility for medical assistance 
under Article V of the Illinois Public Aid Code or for any 
other public aid benefits provided under State law.
 

 
    
Section 99. 
Effective date. 
This Act takes effect October 
1, 2018.
 

  


