







    
AN ACT concerning revenue.


    
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois, 
represented in the General Assembly: 





    
Section 5. 
The Illinois Enterprise Zone Act is amended  by 
changing Sections 4 and 4.1 as follows:






    
(20 ILCS 655/4)
  
(from Ch. 67 1/2, par. 604)






    
Sec. 4. 
Qualifications for Enterprise Zones. 
    
(1) An area is qualified to become an enterprise zone 
which:


    
    
(a) is a contiguous area, provided that a zone area may 
exclude wholly
surrounded territory within its boundaries;


    
    
(b) comprises a minimum of one-half square mile and not 
more than 12
square miles, or 15 square miles if the zone 
is located within the
jurisdiction of 4 or more counties or 
municipalities,  in total area,
exclusive of lakes and 
waterways;
however, in such cases where the enterprise zone 
is a joint effort of
three or more units of government, or 
two or more units of government if
situated in a township 
which is divided by a municipality of 1,000,000 or
more 
inhabitants, and where the certification has been in
effect 
at least one year, the total area shall comprise a minimum 
of
one-half square mile and not more than thirteen square 
miles in total area
exclusive of lakes and waterways;


    
    
(c) (blank);


    
    
(d) (blank);


    
    
(e) is (1) entirely within a municipality or (2) 
entirely within
the unincorporated
areas of a county, 
except where reasonable need is established for such
zone 
to cover portions of more than one municipality or county 
or (3)
both comprises (i) all or part of a municipality and 
(ii) an unincorporated
area of a county; and


    
    
(f)  meets 3 or more of the following criteria: 
    
    
    
(1) all or part of the local labor market area has 
had an annual average unemployment rate of at least 
120% of the State's annual average unemployment rate 
for the most recent calendar year or the most recent 
fiscal year as reported by the Department of Employment 
Security;
    
    
    
(2) designation will result in the development of 
substantial employment opportunities by creating or 
retaining a minimum aggregate of 1,000 full-time 
equivalent jobs due to an aggregate investment of 
$100,000,000 or more, and will help alleviate the 
effects of poverty and unemployment within the local 
labor market area;
    
    
    
(3) all or part of the local labor market area has 
a poverty rate of at least 20% according to the latest 
federal decennial census, 50% or more of children in 
the local labor market area participate in the federal 
free lunch program according to reported statistics 
from the State Board of Education, or 20% or more 
households in the local labor market area receive food 
stamps according to the latest federal decennial 
census;
    
    
    
(4) an abandoned coal mine or a brownfield (as 
defined in Section 58.2 of the Environmental 
Protection Act) is located in the proposed zone area, 
or all or a portion of the proposed zone was declared a 
federal disaster area in the 3 years preceding the date 
of application;
    
    
    
(5) the local labor market area contains a presence 
of large employers  that have downsized over the years, 
the labor market area has experienced plant closures in 
the 5 years prior to the date of application affecting 
more than 50  workers, or the local labor market area 
has experienced State or federal facility closures in 
the 5 years prior to the date of application affecting 
more than 50 workers;
    
    
    
(6) based on data from Multiple Listing Service 
information or other suitable sources, the local labor 
market area contains a high floor vacancy rate of 
industrial or commercial properties, vacant or 
demolished commercial and industrial structures are 
prevalent in the local labor market area, or industrial 
structures in the local labor market area are not used 
because of age, deterioration, relocation of the 
former occupants, or cessation of operation;
    
    
    
(7) the applicant demonstrates a substantial plan 
for using the designation to improve the State and 
local government tax base, including income, sales, 
and property taxes;
    
    
    
(8) significant public infrastructure is present 
in the local labor market area in addition to a plan 
for infrastructure development and improvement; 
    
    
    
(9) high schools or community colleges located 
within the local labor market area are engaged in ACT 
Work Keys, Manufacturing Skills Standard 
Certification, or other industry-based credentials 
that prepare students for careers; 
or
    
    
    
(10) the change in equalized assessed valuation of 
industrial and/or commercial properties in the 5 years 
prior to the date of application is equal to or less 
than 50% of the State average change in equalized 
assessed valuation for industrial and/or commercial 
properties, as applicable, for the same period of time
; 
or
 
.
    
    
    
(11) the applicant demonstrates a substantial plan 
for using the designation to encourage: (i) 
participation by businesses owned by minorities, 
women, and persons with disabilities, as those terms 
are defined in the Business Enterprise for Minorities, 
Women, and Persons with Disabilities Act; and (ii) the 
hiring of minorities, women, and persons with 
disabilities.
 
    
As provided in Section  10-5.3 of the River Edge 
Redevelopment Zone Act, upon the expiration of the term of each 
River Edge Redevelopment Zone in existence on the effective 
date of this amendatory Act of the 97th General Assembly, that 
River Edge Redevelopment Zone will become available for its 
previous designee or a new applicant to compete for designation 
as an enterprise zone. No preference for designation will be 
given to the previous designee of the zone. 
    
(2) Any criteria established by the Department or by law 
which utilize the rate
of unemployment for a particular area 
shall provide that all persons who
are not presently employed 
and have exhausted all unemployment benefits
shall be 
considered unemployed, whether or not such persons are actively

seeking employment.


(Source: P.A. 97-905, eff. 8-7-12.)


    
(20 ILCS 655/4.1)
    
Sec. 4.1. 
Department recommendations.
    
(a)  For all applications that qualify under Section 4 of 
this Act, the Department shall issue recommendations by 
assigning a score to each applicant. The scores will be 
determined by the Department, based on the extent to which an 
applicant meets the criteria points under subsection (f) of 
Section 4 of this Act. Scores will be determined using the 
following scoring system: 
    
    
(1)  Up to 50 points for the extent to which the 
applicant meets or exceeds the criteria in item (1) of 
subsection (f) of Section 4 of this Act, with points 
awarded according to the severity of the unemployment. 
    
    
(2)  Up to 50 points for the extent to which the 
applicant meets or exceeds the criteria in item (2) of 
subsection (f) of Section 4 of this Act, with points 
awarded in accordance with the number of jobs created and 
the aggregate amount of investment promised. 
    
    
(3)  Up to 40 points for the extent to which the 
applicant meets or exceeds the criteria in item (3) of 
subsection (f) of Section 4 of this Act, with points 
awarded in accordance with the severity of the unemployment 
rate according to the latest federal decennial census. 
    
    
(4)  Up to 30 points for the extent to which the 
applicant meets or exceeds the criteria in item (4) of 
subsection (f) of Section 4 of this Act,  with points 
awarded in accordance with the severity of the 
environmental impact of the abandoned coal mine, 
brownfield, or federal disaster area. 
    
    
(5)  Up to 50 points for the extent to which the 
applicant meets or exceeds the criteria in item (5) of 
subsection (f) of Section 4 of this Act,  with points 
awarded in accordance with the severity of the applicable 
facility closures or downsizing. 
    
    
(6)  Up to 40 points for the extent to which the 
applicant meets or exceeds the criteria in item (6) of 
subsection (f) of Section 4 of this Act,  with points 
awarded in accordance with the severity and extent of the 
high floor vacancy or deterioration. 
    
    
(7)  Up to 30 points for the extent to which the 
applicant meets or exceeds the criteria in item (7) of 
subsection (f) of Section 4 of this Act,  with points 
awarded in accordance with the extent to which the 
application addresses a plan to improve the State and local 
government tax base. 
    
    
(8)  Up to 50 points for the extent to which the 
applicant meets or exceeds the criteria in item (8) of 
subsection (f) of Section 4 of this Act,  with points 
awarded in accordance with the existence of significant 
public infrastructure. 
    
    
(9)  Up to 40 points for the extent to which the 
applicant meets or exceeds the criteria in item (9) of 
subsection (f) of Section 4 of this Act,  with points 
awarded in accordance with the extent to which educational 
programs exist for career preparation. 
    
    
(10) Up to 40 points for the extent to which the 
applicant meets or exceeds the criteria in item (10) of 
subsection (f) of Section 4 of this Act, with points 
awarded according to the severity of the change in 
equalized assessed valuation. 
    
    
(11) Up to 40 points for the extent to which the 
applicant meets or exceeds the criteria in item (11) of 
subsection (f) of Section 4 of this Act.
 
    
(b) After assigning a score for each of the individual 
criteria using the point system as described in subsection (a), 
the Department shall then take the sum of the scores for each 
applicant and assign a final score. The Department shall then 
submit this information  to the Board, as required in subsection 
(c) of Section 5.2, as its  recommendation. 


(Source: P.A. 97-905, eff. 8-7-12; 98-109, eff. 7-25-13.)


    
Section 99. 
Effective date. 
This Act takes effect upon 
becoming law.
