
  

  

 
See Index

 
    
Amends the Criminal Code of 2012. Reinstates the death penalty if at 
the time of the commission of the offense the person was 18 years of age or 
older and the person purposely caused the death of 2 or more human beings 
without lawful justification or the victim was a peace officer or 
firefighter killed in the course of performing his or her official duties, 
either to prevent the performance of the person's duties or in retaliation 
for the performance of the person's duties, and the person knew that the 
victim was a peace officer or firefighter. Provides a person is legally 
accountable for the conduct of another in the commission of death penalty 
murder only when: (1)                 having the purpose to cause the death of another 
human being without lawful justification, the person commands, induces, 
procures, or causes another to perform the conduct; or (2)                 the person 
agrees with one or more other persons to engage in conduct for the common 
purpose of causing the death of another human being without lawful 
justification, in which case all parties to the agreement shall be 
criminally liable for acts of other parties to the agreement committed 
during and in furtherance of the agreement. Amends the Code of Criminal 
Procedure of 1963 and Unified Code of Corrections to make conforming 
changes. Effective immediately.

  

  

  
    
AN ACT concerning criminal law.

  
    
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois,
 
represented in the General Assembly:

  

 
    
Section 5. 
The Criminal Code of 2012 is amended  by changing 
Section 5-1 and  by adding Sections 4-4.5, 5-2.5, and 9-1.5 as 
follows:
    
(720 ILCS 5/4-4.5  new)
    
Sec. 4-4.5. 
Purposely or purpose. 
In Section 5-2.5 and 
9-1.5 of this Code, a person acts purposely or with the purpose 
when his or her conscious objective is to cause the death of 
another human being.






    
(720 ILCS 5/5-1)
  
(from Ch. 38, par. 5-1)






    
Sec. 5-1. 
Accountability for conduct of another. 
Except as 
provided in Section 5-2.5 of the Code a
 
A
 person is responsible 
for conduct which is an element of an offense if
the conduct is 
either that of the person himself, or that of another and he
is 
legally accountable for such conduct as provided in Section 5-2 
of this Code
, or
both.


(Source: Laws 1961, p. 1983
.)


    
(720 ILCS 5/5-2.5  new)
    
Sec. 5-2.5. 
Death penalty murder; accountability for acts 
of others. 
A person is legally accountable for the conduct of 
another in the commission of death penalty murder only when:
    
    
(1)                 having the purpose to cause the death of another 
human being without lawful justification, the person 
commands, induces, procures, or causes another to perform 
the conduct; or
    
    
(2)                 the person agrees with one or more other persons to 
engage in conduct for the common purpose of causing the 
death of another human being without lawful justification, 
in which case all parties to the agreement shall be 
criminally liable for acts of other parties to the 
agreement committed during and in furtherance of the 
agreement.
    
(720 ILCS 5/9-1.5  new)
    
Sec. 9-1.5. 
Death penalty murder.
    
(a) In this Section, "human being" means a person who has 
been born and is alive.
    
(b)  A person commits death penalty murder when at the time 
of the commission of the offense he or she has attained the age 
of 18 or more and he or she purposely causes the death of 
another human being without lawful justification if:
    
    
(1) at the time of the offense, the person caused the 
death of 2 or more other human beings without lawful 
justification; or
    
    
(2) the victim was a peace officer, as defined by 
Section 2-13 of this Code or firefighter, killed in the 
course of performing his or her official duties, either to 
prevent the performance of the person's duties or in 
retaliation for the performance of the person's duties, and 
the person knew that the victim was a peace officer or 
firefighter.
    
(c) The trier of fact regarding the charge of death penalty 
murder shall resolve any doubt regarding identification or any 
element of the offense in favor of the defendant.  A defendant 
shall not be found guilty of the offense of death penalty 
murder unless each and every element of the offense is 
established beyond any doubt.  If the trial is by jury, before 
the trial commences and again before jury deliberations 
commence, the jury shall be instructed that the penalty for 
death penalty murder is death.
    
(d) A defendant, who has been found guilty of death penalty 
murder, may, at a separate sentencing hearing, present evidence 
of mitigating circumstances not rising to the level of legal 
justification, including but not limited to evidence of 
intellectual disability as provided in Section 114-15 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963. The prosecution may present 
rebuttal evidence. The hearing shall be before the trial judge. 
The judge shall sentence the defendant to death, unless he or 
she finds that the defendant has, by a preponderance of the 
evidence, presented sufficiently substantial evidence to prove 
intellectual disability or that imposition of the death penalty 
would result in a manifest miscarriage of justice, in which 
case the judge shall sentence the defendant to life 
imprisonment without the possibility of parole.
    
(e) On appeal from a conviction of death penalty murder, 
review of the facts shall be de novo. In conducting its de novo 
review of the trial evidence, the appellate court shall resolve 
all doubt regarding identification and guilt in favor of the 
defendant. The appellate court shall conduct an independent 
review of the evidence without giving deference to the judgment 
of the trier of fact at trial.
    
(f) Sentence. The sentence for death penalty murder is 
death.
    
Section 10. 
The Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 is 
amended  by changing Sections 114-15, 119-1, and 122-2.2 as 
follows:
    
(725 ILCS 5/114-15)


    
Sec. 114-15. 
Intellectual disability.
    
(a) In a first degree murder case in which the State seeks 
the death
penalty as an appropriate sentence 
or in a death 
penalty murder case
, any party may raise the issue of the

defendant's intellectual disabilities by motion. A defendant 
wishing to raise the
issue of his or her intellectual 
disabilities shall provide written notice to the
State
and the 
court as soon as the defendant reasonably believes such issue 
will be
raised.


    
(b) The issue of the defendant's intellectual disabilities 
shall be
determined in a pretrial hearing. The court shall be 
the fact finder on the
issue of the defendant's intellectual 
disabilities and shall determine the issue by a
preponderance 
of evidence in which the moving party has the burden of proof.

The court may appoint an expert in the field of intellectual 
disabilities. The defendant and the State may offer experts 
from the
field of intellectual disabilities. The court shall 
determine admissibility of
evidence and qualification as an 
expert.



    
(c) If after a plea of guilty to first degree murder 
or 
death penalty murder
, or a finding of guilty
of first degree 
murder 
or death penalty murder
 in a bench trial, or a verdict 
of guilty for first
degree
murder 
or death penalty murder
 in a 
jury trial, or on a matter remanded from the Supreme Court for

sentencing for first degree murder 
or death penalty murder
, and 
the State seeks the death penalty as an
appropriate sentence, 
the defendant may raise the issue of defendant's intellectual 
disabilities not at eligibility but at aggravation and 
mitigation.  The
defendant
and the State may offer experts from 
the field of intellectual disabilities.  The
court shall 
determine admissibility of evidence and qualification as an 
expert.


    
(d) In determining whether the defendant is a person with 
an intellectual disability, the intellectual disability
 must 
have manifested itself by the age of 18.
 IQ tests and 
psychometric tests administered to the defendant
must be the 
kind and type recognized by experts in the field of 
intellectual disabilities. In order for the defendant to be 
considered a person with an intellectual disability, a
low IQ 
must be accompanied by
significant deficits in adaptive 
behavior in at least 2 of
the
following skill areas: 
communication, self-care, social or interpersonal
skills,
home 
living, self-direction, academics, health and safety, use of 
community
resources, and work.
 An
intelligence quotient (IQ) of 
75 or below is presumptive evidence of an intellectual 
disability.


    
(e) Evidence of an intellectual disability that did not 
result in disqualifying
the case as a capital case, may be 
introduced as evidence in mitigation
during a capital 
sentencing hearing. A failure of the court to determine that

the defendant is a person with an intellectual disability does 
not preclude the court during trial
from allowing evidence 
relating to mental disability should the court deem it

appropriate.



    
(f) If the court determines at a pretrial hearing or after 
remand that a
capital defendant
is a person with an 
intellectual disability, and the State does not appeal pursuant 
to Supreme Court
Rule 604, the case shall no longer be 
considered a capital case and the
procedural guidelines 
established for capital cases shall no longer be
applicable to 
the defendant.  In that case, the defendant shall be sentenced

under the sentencing provisions of Chapter V of the Unified 
Code of
Corrections.




(Source: P.A. 99-143, eff. 7-27-15.)
    
(725 ILCS 5/119-1)
    
Sec. 119-1. 
Death penalty abolished.
    
(a) 
Except as otherwise provided in subsection (a-5) of 
this Section, beginning
 
Beginning
 on the effective date of this 
amendatory Act of the 96th General Assembly, notwithstanding 
any other law to the contrary, the death penalty is abolished 
and a sentence to death may not be imposed. 
    
(a-5) A sentence of death shall be imposed for death 
penalty murder.
 
    
(b) All unobligated and unexpended moneys remaining in the 
Capital Litigation Trust Fund on the effective date of this 
amendatory Act of the 96th General Assembly shall be 
transferred into the Death Penalty Abolition Fund, a special 
fund in the State treasury, to be expended by the Illinois 
Criminal Justice Information Authority, for services for 
families of victims of homicide or murder and for training of 
law enforcement personnel. 


(Source: P.A. 96-1543, eff. 7-1-11
.)
    
(725 ILCS 5/122-2.2)


    
Sec. 122-2.2. 
Intellectual disability and post-conviction 
relief.

    
(a) In cases where no determination of an intellectual 
disability was made and a
defendant has been convicted of 
first-degree
murder 
or death penalty murder
, sentenced to 
death, and is in custody pending execution of the
sentence of 
death, the following procedures shall apply:


    
    
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law or rule 
of court, a
defendant may seek relief from the death 
sentence through a petition for
post-conviction relief 
under this Article alleging that the defendant was a person 
with an intellectual disability
 as defined in Section 
114-15 at the time the offense was
alleged to have been

committed.



    
    
(2) The petition must be filed within 180 days of the 
effective date of
this
amendatory Act of the 93rd General 
Assembly or within 180 days of the
issuance of the mandate 
by the Illinois Supreme Court setting the date of

execution, whichever is later.



    
(b) All other provisions of this Article governing 
petitions for
post-conviction relief shall apply to a petition 
for post-conviction relief
alleging an intellectual 
disability.




(Source: P.A. 99-78, eff. 7-20-15; 99-143, eff. 7-27-15.)
    
Section 15. 
The Unified Code of Corrections is amended  by 
changing Section 5-4.5-10 and  by adding Section 5-4.5-20.5 as 
follows:
    
(730 ILCS 5/5-4.5-10)
    
Sec. 5-4.5-10. 
OFFENSE CLASSIFICATIONS.
    
(a) FELONY CLASSIFICATIONS. Felonies are classified, for 
the purpose of sentencing, as follows:
    
    
(1) First degree murder (as a separate class of 
felony).
    
    
(1.5) Death penalty murder (as a separate class of 
felony).
 
    
    
(2) Class X felonies.
    
    
(3) Class 1 felonies.
    
    
(4) Class 2 felonies.
    
    
(5) Class 3 felonies.
    
    
(6) Class 4 felonies.
    
(b) MISDEMEANOR CLASSIFICATIONS.  Misdemeanors are 
classified, for the purpose of sentencing, as follows:
    
    
(1) Class A misdemeanors.
    
    
(2) Class B misdemeanors.
    
    
(3) Class C misdemeanors.

    
(c) PETTY AND BUSINESS OFFENSES. Petty offenses and 
business offenses are not classified.


(Source: P.A. 95-1052, eff. 7-1-09
.)
    
(730 ILCS 5/5-4.5-20.5  new)
    
Sec. 5-4.5-20.5. 
DEATH PENALTY MURDER; SENTENCE. 
For death 
penalty murder, the defendant shall be sentenced to death, 
unless the trial judge finds that the defendant has, by a 
preponderance of the evidence, presented sufficiently 
substantial evidence to outweigh the circumstances of the 
offense and the evidence presented by the prosecution at the 
sentencing hearing, in which case the judge shall sentence the 
defendant to life imprisonment without the possibility of 
parole.

  
    
Section 99. 
Effective date. 
This Act takes effect upon 
becoming law.


    
720 ILCS 5/4-4.5 new


    
720 ILCS 5/5-1
from Ch. 38, par. 5-1


    
720 ILCS 5/5-2.5 new
    
720 ILCS 5/9-1.5 new
    
725 ILCS 5/114-15


    
725 ILCS 5/119-1
    
725 ILCS 5/122-2.2


    
730 ILCS 5/5-4.5-10
    
730 ILCS 5/5-4.5-20.5 new
