
  

  

 
 
725 ILCS 5/113-8
 

 
    
Amends the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963. Provides that if the 
defendant is arraigned on or after the effective date of the bill, and the 
court fails to advise the defendant before the acceptance of a plea of 
guilty, guilty but mentally ill, or nolo contendere to a misdemeanor or 
felony offense, that "if you are not a citizen of the United States, you 
are hereby advised that conviction of the offense for which you have been 
charged may have the consequences of deportation, exclusion from admission 
to the United States, or denial of naturalization under the laws of the 
United States," and the defendant shows that conviction of the offense to 
which the defendant pleaded guilty, guilty but mentally ill, or nolo 
contendere may have the consequences for the defendant of deportation, 
exclusion from admission to the United States, or denial of naturalization 
under the laws of the United States, the court, upon the defendant's 
motion, shall vacate the judgment and permit the defendant to withdraw the 
plea of guilty, guilty but mentally ill, or nolo contendere and enter a 
plea of not guilty.

  

  

  
    
AN ACT concerning criminal law.

  
    
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois,
 
represented in the General Assembly:

  

 
    
Section 5. 
The Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 is 
amended  by changing Section 113-8 as follows:






    
(725 ILCS 5/113-8)






    
Sec. 113-8. 
Advisement concerning status as an alien.
    
(a)
 Before the acceptance of a plea of guilty, guilty but 
mentally ill, or
nolo contendere to a misdemeanor or felony

offense, the court shall give the following advisement to the 
defendant in open
court:


    
"If you are not a citizen of the United States, you are 
hereby advised that
conviction of the offense for which you

have been charged may have the consequences of deportation, 
exclusion from
admission to the United States, or denial of

naturalization under the laws of the United States.".


    
(b) If the defendant is arraigned on or after the effective 
date of this amendatory Act of the 100th General Assembly, and 
the court fails to advise the defendant as required by 
subsection (a) of this Section, and the defendant shows that 
conviction of the offense to which the defendant pleaded 
guilty, guilty but mentally ill, or nolo contendere may have 
the consequences for the defendant of deportation, exclusion 
from admission to the United States, or denial of 
naturalization under the laws of the United States, the court, 
upon the defendant's motion, shall vacate the judgment and 
permit the defendant to withdraw the plea of guilty, guilty but 
mentally ill, or nolo contendere and enter a plea of not 
guilty.
(Source: P.A. 93-373, eff. 1-1-04.)



  


