HB600
186692-1
By Representative Sessions
RFD: Agriculture and Forestry
First Read: 09-MAY-17
186692-1:n:05/09/2017:FC/tj LRS2017-2098
SYNOPSIS:           Under existing law, an exemption from the
state sales tax is provided for the sale of fruit
or agricultural products by a person or corporation
that planted, cultivated, and harvested the fruit
or agricultural product.
This bill would specify that the exemption
would apply to the sale of fruit or agricultural
products by the person or corporation that planted
or cultivated and harvested the fruit or
agricultural product. In addition, the gross
receipts derived from the sale of pine straw
products by the person that harvested the product
would be exempt from sales tax.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
To amend Section 40-23-4 of the Code of Alabama
1975, relating to the state sales tax, to specify that the
exemption for the sale of fruit or agricultural products
includes sales of fruit or agricultural products by a person
or corporation that planted or cultivated and harvested the
fruit or agricultural products; and to exempt the gross
receipts from pine straw products by the person that harvested
the product.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Section 40-23-4 of the Code of Alabama
1975, is amended to read as follows:
"§40-23-4.
"(a) There are exempted from the provisions of this
division and from the computation of the amount of the tax
levied, assessed, or payable under this division the
following:
"(1) The gross proceeds of the sales of lubricating
oil and gasoline as defined in Sections 40-17-30 and 40-17-170
and the gross proceeds from those sales of lubricating oil
destined for out-of-state use which are transacted in a manner
whereby an out-of-state purchaser takes delivery of such oil
at a distributor's plant within this state and transports it
out-of-state, which are otherwise taxed.
"(2) The gross proceeds of the sale, or sales, of
fertilizer when used for agricultural purposes. The word
"fertilizer" shall not be construed to include cottonseed
meal, when not in combination with other materials.
"(3) The gross proceeds of the sale, or sales, of
seeds for planting purposes and baby chicks and poults.
Nothing herein shall be construed to exempt or exclude from
the computation of the tax levied, assessed, or payable, the
gross proceeds of the sale or sales of plants, seedlings,
nursery stock, or floral products.
"(4) The gross proceeds of sales of insecticides and
fungicides when used for agricultural purposes or when used by
persons properly permitted by the Department of Agriculture
and Industries or any applicable local or state governmental
authority for structural pest control work and feed for
livestock and poultry, but not including prepared food for
dogs and cats.
"(5) The gross proceeds of sales of all livestock by
whomsoever sold, and also the gross proceeds of poultry and
other products of the farm, dairy, grove, or garden, when in
the original state of production or condition of preparation
for sale, when such sale or sales are made by the producer or
members of his immediate family or for him by those employed
by him to assist in the production thereof. Nothing herein
shall be construed to exempt or exclude from the measure or
computation of the tax levied, assessed, or payable hereunder,
the gross proceeds of sales of poultry or poultry products
when not products of the farm.
"(6) Cottonseed meal exchanged for cottonseed at or
by cotton gins.
"(7) The gross receipts from the business on which,
or for engaging in which, a license or privilege tax is levied
by or under the provisions of Sections 40-21-50, 40-21-53, and
40-21-56 through 40-21-60; provided, that nothing contained in
this subdivision shall be construed to exempt or relieve the
person or persons operating the business enumerated in said
sections from the payments of the tax levied by this division
upon or measured by the gross proceeds of sales of any
tangible personal property, except gas and water, the gross
receipts from the sale of which are the measure of the tax
levied by said Section 40-21-50, merchandise or other tangible
commodities sold at retail by said persons, unless the gross
proceeds of sale thereof are otherwise specifically exempted
by the provisions of this division.
"(8) The gross proceeds of sales or gross receipts
of or by any person, firm, or corporation, from the sale of
transportation, gas, water, or electricity, of the kinds and
natures, the rates and charges for which, when sold by public
utilities, are customarily fixed and determined by the Public
Service Commission of Alabama or like regulatory bodies.
"(9) The gross proceeds of the sale, or sales of
wood residue, coal, or coke to manufacturers, electric power
companies, and transportation companies for use or consumption
in the production of by-products, or the generation of heat or
power used in manufacturing tangible personal property for
sale, for the generation of electric power or energy for use
in manufacturing tangible personal property for sale or for
resale, or for the generation of motive power for
transportation.
"(10) The gross proceeds from the sale or sales of
fuel and supplies for use or consumption aboard ships,
vessels, towing vessels, or barges, or drilling ships, rigs or
barges, or seismic or geophysical vessels, or other watercraft
(herein for purposes of this exemption being referred to as
"vessels") engaged in foreign or international commerce or in
interstate commerce; provided, that nothing in this division
shall be construed to exempt or exclude from the measure of
the tax herein levied the gross proceeds of sale or sales of
material and supplies to any person for use in fulfilling a
contract for the painting, repair, or reconditioning of
vessels, barges, ships, other watercraft, and commercial
fishing vessels of over five tons load displacement as
registered with the U.S. Coast Guard and licensed by the State
of Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural Resources.
"For purposes of this subdivision, it shall be
presumed that vessels engaged in the transportation of cargo
between ports in the State of Alabama and ports in foreign
countries or possessions or territories of the United States
or between ports in the State of Alabama and ports in other
states are engaged in foreign or international commerce or
interstate commerce, as the case may be. For the purposes of
this subdivision, the engaging in foreign or international
commerce or interstate commerce shall not require that the
vessel involved deliver cargo to or receive cargo from a port
in the State of Alabama. For purposes of this subdivision,
vessels carrying passengers for hire, and no cargo, between
ports in the State of Alabama and ports in foreign countries
or possessions or territories of the United States or between
ports in the State of Alabama and ports in other states shall
be engaged in foreign or international commerce or interstate
commerce, as the case may be, if, and only if, both of the
following conditions are met: (i) The vessel in question is a
vessel of at least 100 gross tons; and (ii) the vessel in
question has an unexpired certificate of inspection issued by
the United States Coast Guard or by the proper authority of a
foreign country for a foreign vessel, which certificate is
recognized as acceptable under the laws of the United States.
Vessels which are engaged in foreign or international commerce
or interstate commerce shall be deemed for the purposes of
this subdivision to remain in such commerce while awaiting or
under repair in a port of the State of Alabama if such vessel
returns after such repairs are completed to engaging in
foreign or international commerce or interstate commerce. For
purposes of this subdivision, seismic or geophysical vessels
which are engaged either in seismic or geophysical tests or
evaluations exclusively in offshore federal waters or in
traveling to or from conducting such tests or evaluations
shall be deemed to be engaged in international or foreign
commerce. For purposes of this subdivision, proof that fuel
and supplies purchased are for use or consumption aboard
vessels engaged in foreign or international commerce or in
interstate commerce may be accomplished by the merchant or
seller securing the duly signed certificate of the vessel
owner, operator, or captain or their respective agent on a
form prescribed by the department that the fuel and supplies
purchased are for use or consumption aboard vessels engaged in
foreign or international commerce or in interstate commerce.
Any person filing a false certificate shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not less than
$25 nor more than $500 for each offense. Each false
certificate filed shall constitute a separate offense. Any
person filing a false certificate shall be liable to the
department for all taxes imposed by this division upon the
merchant or seller, together with any interest or penalties
thereon, by reason of the sale or sales of fuel and supplies
applicable to such false certificate. If a merchant or seller
of fuel and supplies secures the certificate herein mentioned,
properly completed, such merchant or seller shall not be
liable for the taxes imposed by this division, if such
merchant or seller had no knowledge that such certificate was
false when it was filed with such merchant or seller.
"(11) The gross proceeds of sales of tangible
personal property to the State of Alabama, to the counties
within the state and to incorporated municipalities of the
State of Alabama.
"(12) The gross proceeds of the sale or sales of
railroad cars, vessels, barges, and commercial fishing vessels
of over five tons load displacement as registered with the
U.S. Coast Guard and licensed by the State of Alabama
Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, when sold by
the manufacturers or builders thereof.
"(13) The gross proceeds of the sale or sales of
materials, equipment, and machinery which, at any time, enter
into and become a component part of ships, vessels, towing
vessels or barges, or drilling ships, rigs or barges, or
seismic or geophysical vessels, other watercraft and
commercial fishing vessels of over five tons load displacement
as registered with the U.S. Coast Guard and licensed by the
State of Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural
Resources. Additionally, the gross proceeds from the sale or
sales of lifeboats, personal flotation devices, ring life
buoys, survival craft equipment, distress signals, EPIRB's,
fire extinguishers, injury placards, waste management plans
and logs, marine sanitation devices, navigation rulebooks,
navigation lights, sound signals, navigation day shapes, oil
placard cards, garbage placards, FCC SSL, stability
instructions, first aid equipment, compasses, anchor and radar
reflectors, general alarm systems, bilge pumps, piping, and
discharge and electronic position fixing devices which are
used on the aforementioned watercraft.
"(14) The gross proceeds of the sale or sales of
fuel oil purchased as fuel for kiln use in manufacturing
establishments.
"(15) The gross proceeds of the sale or sales of
tangible personal property to county and city school boards
within the State of Alabama, independent school boards within
the State of Alabama, all educational institutions and
agencies of the State of Alabama, the counties within the
state, or any incorporated municipalities of the State of
Alabama, and private educational institutions operating within
the State of Alabama offering conventional and traditional
courses of study, such as those offered by public schools,
colleges, or universities within the State of Alabama; but not
including nurseries, day care centers, and home schools.
"(16) The gross proceeds from the sale of all
devices or facilities, and all identifiable components
thereof, or materials for use therein, acquired primarily for
the control, reduction, or elimination of air or water
pollution and the gross proceeds from the sale of all
identifiable components of or materials used or intended for
use in structures built primarily for the control, reduction,
or elimination of air and water pollution.
"(17) The gross proceeds of sales of tangible
personal property or the gross receipts of any business which
the state is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or
laws of the United States or under the Constitution of this
state.
"(18) When dealers or distributors use parts taken
from stocks owned by them in making repairs without charge for
such parts to the owner of the property repaired pursuant to
warranty agreements entered into by manufacturers, such use
shall not constitute taxable sales to the manufacturers,
distributors, or to the dealers, under this division or under
any county sales tax law.
"(19) The gross proceeds received from the sale or
furnishing of food, including potato chips, candy, fruit and
similar items, soft drinks, tobacco products, and stationery
and other similar or related articles by hospital canteens
operated by Alabama state hospitals at Bryce Hospital and
Partlow State School for Mental Deficients at Tuscaloosa,
Alabama, and Searcy Hospital at Mt. Vernon, Alabama, for the
benefit of the patients therein.
"(20) The gross proceeds of the sale, or sales, of
wrapping paper and other wrapping materials when used in
preparing poultry or poultry products for delivery, shipment,
or sale by the producer, processor, packer, or seller of such
poultry or poultry products, including pallets used in
shipping poultry and egg products, paper or other materials
used for lining boxes or other containers in which poultry or
poultry products are packed together with any other materials
placed in such containers for the delivery, shipment, or sale
of poultry or poultry products.
"(21) The gross proceeds of the sales of all
antibiotics, hormones and hormone preparations, drugs,
medicines or medications, vitamins, minerals or other
nutrients, and all other feed ingredients including
concentrates, supplements, and other feed ingredients when
such substances are used as ingredients in mixing and
preparing feed for fish raised to be sold on a commercial
basis, livestock, and poultry. Such exemption herein granted
shall be in addition to exemptions now provided by law for
feed for fish raised to be sold on a commercial basis,
livestock, and poultry, but not including prepared foods for
dogs or cats.
"(22) The gross proceeds of the sale, or sales, of
seedlings, plants, shoots, and slips which are to be used for
planting vegetable gardens or truck farms and other
agricultural purposes. Nothing herein shall be construed to
exempt, or exclude from the computation of the tax levied,
assessed, or payable, the gross proceeds of the sale, or the
use of plants, seedlings, shoots, slips, nursery stock, and
floral products, except as hereinabove exempted.
"(23) The gross proceeds of the sale, or sales, of
fabricated steel tube sections, when produced and fabricated
in this state by any person, firm, or corporation for any
vehicular tunnel for highway vehicular traffic, when sold by
the manufacturer or fabricator thereof, and also the gross
proceeds of the sale, or sales, of steel which enters into and
becomes a component part of such fabricated steel tube
sections of said tunnel.
"(24) The gross proceeds from sales of admissions to
any theatrical production, symphonic or other orchestral
concert, ballet, or opera production when such concert or
production is presented by any society, association, guild, or
workshop group, organized within this state, whose members or
some of whose members regularly and actively participate in
such concerts or productions for the purposes of providing a
creative outlet for the cultural and educational interests of
such members, and of promoting such interests for the
betterment of the community by presenting such productions to
the general public for an admission charge. The employment of
a paid director or conductor to assist in any such
presentation described in this subdivision shall not be
construed to prohibit the exemptions herein provided.
"(25) The gross proceeds of sales of herbicides for
agricultural uses by whomsoever sold. The term herbicides, as
used in this subdivision, means any substance or mixture of
substances intended to prevent, destroy, repel, or retard the
growth of weeds or plants. It shall include preemergence
herbicides, postemergence herbicides, lay-by herbicides,
pasture herbicides, defoliant herbicides, and desiccant
herbicides.
"(26) The Alabama Chapter of the Cystic Fibrosis
Research Foundation and the Jefferson Tuberculosis Sanatorium
and any of their departments or agencies, heretofore or
hereafter organized and existing in good faith in the State of
Alabama for purposes other than for pecuniary gain and not for
individual profit, shall be exempted from the computation of
the tax on the gross proceeds of all sales levied, assessed,
or payable.
"(27) The gross proceeds from the sale or sales of
fuel for use or consumption aboard commercial fishing vessels
are hereby exempt from the computation of all sales taxes
levied, assessed, or payable under the provisions of this
division or levied under any county or municipal sales tax
law.
"The words commercial fishing vessels shall mean
vessels whose masters and owners are regularly and exclusively
engaged in fishing as their means of livelihood.
"(28) The gross proceeds of sales of sawdust, wood
shavings, wood chips, and other like materials sold for use as
chicken litter by poultry producers and poultry processors.
"(29) The gross proceeds of the sales of all
antibiotics, hormones and hormone preparations, drugs,
medicines, and other medications including serums and
vaccines, vitamins, minerals, or other nutrients for use in
the production and growing of fish, livestock, and poultry by
whomsoever sold. Such exemption as herein granted shall be in
addition to the exemption provided by law for feed for fish,
livestock, and poultry, and in addition to the exemptions
provided by law for the above-enumerated substances and
products when mixed and used as ingredients in fish,
livestock, and poultry feed.
"(30) The gross proceeds of the sale or sales of all
medicines prescribed by physicians for persons who are 65
years of age or older, and when said prescriptions are filled
by licensed pharmacists, shall be exempted under this division
or under any county or municipal sales tax law. The exemption
provided in this section shall not apply to any medicine
purchased in any manner other than as is herein provided.
"For the purposes of this subdivision, proof of age
may be accomplished by filing with the dispensing pharmacist
any one or more of the following documents:
"a. The name and claim number as shown on a
"Medicare" card issued by the United States Social Security
Administration.
"b. A certificate executed by any adult person
having knowledge of the fact that the person for whom the
medicine was prescribed is not less than 65 years of age.
"c. An affidavit executed by any adult person having
knowledge of the fact that the person for whom the medicine
was prescribed is not less than 65 years of age.
"For the purposes of this subdivision, any person
filing a false proof of age shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of
$100.
"(31) There shall be exempted from the tax levied by
this division the gross receipts of sales of grass sod of all
kinds and character when in the original state of production
or condition of preparation for sale, when such sales are made
by the producer or members of his family or for him by those
employed by him to assist in the production thereof; provided,
that nothing herein shall be construed to exempt sales of sod
by a person engaged in the business of selling plants,
seedlings, nursery stock, or floral products.
"(32) The gross receipts of sales of the following
items or materials which are necessary in the farm-to-market
production of tomatoes when such items or materials are used
by the producer or members of his family or for him by those
employed by him to assist in the production thereof: Twine for
tying tomatoes, tomato stakes, field boxes (wooden boxes used
to take tomatoes from the fields to shed), and tomato boxes
used in shipments to customers.
"(33) The gross proceeds from the sale of liquefied
petroleum gas or natural gas sold to be used for agricultural
purposes.
"(34) The gross receipts of sales from state
nurseries of forest tree seedlings.
"(35) The gross receipts of sales of forest tree
seed by the state.
"(36) The gross receipts of sales of Lespedeza
bicolor and other species of perennial plant seed and
seedlings sold for wildlife and game food production purposes
by the state.
"(37) The gross receipts of any aircraft
manufactured, sold, and delivered in this state if said
aircraft are not permanently domiciled in Alabama and are
removed to another state.
"(38) The gross proceeds from the sale or sales of
all diesel fuel used for off-highway agricultural purposes.
"(39) The gross proceeds from sales of admissions to
any sporting event which:
"a. Takes place in the State of Alabama on or after
January 1, 1984, regardless of when such sales occur; and
"b. Is hosted by a not-for-profit corporation
organized and existing under the laws of the State of Alabama;
and
"c. Determines a national championship of a national
organization, including but not limited to the Professional
Golfers Association of America, the Tournament Players
Association, the United States Golf Association, the United
States Tennis Association, and the National Collegiate
Athletic Association; and
"d. Has not been held in the State of Alabama on
more than one prior occasion, provided, however, that for such
purpose the Professional Golfers Association Championship, the
United States Open Golf Championship, the United States
Amateur Golf Championship of the United States Golf
Association, and the United States Open Tennis Championship
shall each be treated as a separate event.
"(40) The gross receipts from the sale of any
aircraft and replacement parts, components, systems, supplies,
and sundries affixed or used on said aircraft and ground
support equipment and vehicles used by or for the aircraft to
or by a certificated or licensed air carrier with a hub
operation within this state, for use in conducting intrastate,
interstate, or foreign commerce for transporting people or
property by air. For the purpose of this subdivision, the
words "hub operation within this state" shall be construed to
have all of the following criteria:
"a. There originates from the location 15 or more
flight departures and five or more different first-stop
destinations five days per week for six or more months during
the calendar year; and
"b. Passengers and/or property are regularly
exchanged at the location between flights of the same or a
different certificated or licensed air carrier.
"(41) The gross receipts from the sale of hot or
cold food and beverage products sold to or by a certificated
or licensed air carrier with a hub operation within this
state, for use in conducting intrastate, interstate, or
foreign commerce for transporting people or property by air.
For the purpose of this subdivision, the words "hub operation
within this state" shall be construed to have all of the
following criteria:
"a. There originates from the location 15 or more
flight departures and five or more different first-stop
destinations five days per week for six or more months during
the calendar year; and
"b. Passengers and/or property are regularly
exchanged at the location between flights of the same or a
different certificated or licensed air carrier.
"(42) The gross receipts from the sale of any
aviation jet fuel to a certificated or licensed air carrier
purchased for use in scheduled all-cargo operations being
conducted on international flights or in international
commerce. For purposes of this subdivision, the following
words or terms shall be defined and interpreted as follows:
"a. Air Carrier. Any person, firm, corporation, or
entity undertaking by any means, directly or indirectly, to
provide air transportation.
"b. All-Cargo Operations. Any flight conducted by an
air carrier for compensation or hire other than a passenger
carrying flight, except passengers as specified in 14 C.F.R.
§121.583(a) or 14 C.F.R. §135.85, as amended.
"c. International Commerce. Any air carrier engaged
in all-cargo operations transporting goods for compensation or
hire on international flights.
"d. International Flights. Any air carrier
conducting scheduled all-cargo operations between any point
within the 50 states of the United States and the District of
Columbia and any point outside the 50 states of the United
States and the District of Columbia, including any interim
stops within the United States so long as the ultimate origin
or destination of the aircraft is outside the United States
and the District of Columbia.
"(43) The gross proceeds of the sale or sales of the
following:
"a. Drill pipe, casing, tubing, and other pipe used
for the exploration for or production of oil, gas, sulphur, or
other minerals in offshore federal waters.
"b. Tangible personal property exclusively used for
the exploration for or production of oil, gas, sulphur, or
other minerals in offshore federal waters.
"c. Fuel and supplies for use or consumption aboard
boats, ships, aircraft, and towing vessels when used
exclusively in transporting persons or property between a
point in Alabama and a point or points in offshore federal
waters for the exploration for or production of oil, gas,
sulphur, or other minerals in offshore federal waters.
"d. Drilling equipment that is used for the
exploration for or production of oil, gas, sulphur, or other
minerals, that is built for exclusive use outside this state
and that is, on completion, removed forthwith from this state.
"The delivery of items exempted by this subdivision
to the purchaser or lessee in this state does not disqualify
the purchaser or lessee from the exemption if the property is
removed from the state by any means, including by the use of
the purchaser's or lessee's own facilities.
"The shipment to a place in this state of equipment
exempted by this subdivision for further assembly or
fabrication does not disqualify the purchaser or lessee from
the exemption if on completion of the further assembly or
fabrication the equipment is removed forthwith from this
state. This subdivision applies to a sale that may occur when
the equipment exempted is further assembled or fabricated if
on completion the equipment is removed forthwith from this
state.
"(44) The gross receipts derived from all bingo
games and operations which are conducted in compliance with
validly enacted legislation authorizing the conduct of such
games and operations, and which comply with the distribution
requirements of the applicable local laws; provided that the
exemption from sales taxation granted by this subdivision
shall apply only to gross receipts taxable under subdivision
(2) of Section 40-23-2. It is further provided that this
exemption shall not apply to any gross receipts from the sale
of tangible personal property, such as concessions, novelties,
food, beverages, etc. The exemption provided for in this
section shall be limited to those games and operations by
organizations which have qualified for exemption under the
provisions of 26 U.S.C. § 501 (c) (3), (4), (7), (8), (10), or
(19), or which are defined in 26 U.S.C. § 501(d).
"(45) The gross receipts derived from the sale or
sales of fruit or other agricultural products by the person or
corporation that planted, or cultivated, and harvested such
the fruit or agricultural product.
"(46) The gross receipts derived from the sale or
sales of all domestically mined or produced coal, coke, and
coke by-products used in cogeneration plants.
"(47) The gross receipts from the sale or sales of
metal, other than gold or silver, when such metal is purchased
for the purpose of transferring such metal to an investment
trust in exchange for shares or other units, each of which are
both publicly traded and represent fractional undivided
beneficial interests in the trust's net assets, including
metal stored in warehouses located in this state, as well as
the gross proceeds from the sale or other transfer of such
metal to or from such investment trust in exchange for shares
or other units that are publicly traded and represent
fractional undivided beneficial interests in the trust's net
assets but not to the extent that metal is transferred to or
from the investment trust in exchange for consideration other
than such publicly traded shares or other units. For purposes
of this subdivision, the term metals includes, but is not
limited to, copper, aluminum, nickel, zinc, tin, lead, and
other similar metals typically used in commercial and
industrial applications.
"(48) For the period commencing on October 1, 2012,
and ending May 30, 2022, unless extended by joint resolution,
the gross receipts from the sale of parts, components, and
systems that become a part of a fixed or rotary wing military
aircraft or certified transport category aircraft that
undergoes conversion, reconfiguration, or general maintenance
so long as the address of the aircraft for FAA registration is
not in the state; provided, however, that this exemption shall
not apply to a local sales tax unless previously exempted by
local law or approved by resolution of the local governing
body.
"(49) The gross proceeds from the sale or sales
within school buildings of lunches to pupils of kindergarten,
grammar, and high schools, either public or private, that are
not sold for profit.
"(b) Any violation of any provision of this section
shall be punishable in a court of competent jurisdiction by a
fine of not less than $500 and no more than $2,000 and
imprisonment of not less than six months nor more than one
year in the county jail.
"(50) The gross receipts derived from the sale or
sales of pine straw products by the person or corporation that
harvested the product."
Section 2. This act shall become effective
immediately following its passage and approval by the
Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.