HB254
180836-1
By Representative Weaver
RFD: Boards, Agencies and Commissions
First Read: 16-FEB-17
180836-1:n:12/16/2016:PMG/tj LRS2016-3472
SYNOPSIS:          Under existing law, the State Board of
Nursing employs investigators who investigate
alleged violations of the Nurse Practice Act,
including violations involving drugs or controlled
substances. The investigators do not have the power
of law enforcement officers and are not required to
meet the minimum standards for law enforcement
officers.
This bill would grant investigators of the
Board of Nursing who meet the minimum standards of
the Alabama Peace Officers' Minimum Standards and
Training Commission authority to exercise the
powers of law enforcement officers, except the
power to make arrests, in investigating alleged
violations perpetrated by licensees of the Nurse
Practice Act and the Alabama Uniform Controlled
Substances Act.
This bill would also authorize the Board of
Nursing to expunge, for purposes of public
disclosure, records of disciplinary actions taken
against licensed nurses.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
Relating to the Board of Nursing; to amend Sections
20-2-90 and 34-21-2, Code of Alabama 1975; to grant
investigators of the board who meet the minimum standards of
the Alabama Peace Officers' Minimum Standards and Training
Commission authority to exercise the powers of law enforcement
officers, except the power to make arrests, in investigating
alleged violations perpetrated by licensees of the Nurse
Practice Act and the Alabama Uniform Controlled Substances
Act; and to authorize the Board of Nursing to expunge, for
purposes of public disclosure, records of disciplinary actions
taken against licensed nurses.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Sections 20-2-90 and 34-21-2, Code of
Alabama 1975, are amended to read as follows:
"ยง20-2-90.
"(a) The State Board of Pharmacy and its drug
inspectors shall enforce all provisions of this chapter. The
agents and officers of this the Alabama State Law Enforcement
Agency, the drug and narcotic agents and inspectors of the
State Board of Health, the investigators of the State Board of
Medical Examiners, the investigators of the Board of Dental
Examiners, the investigators of the Board of Nursing, and all
peace law enforcement officers of the state and all
prosecuting attorneys are also charged with the enforcement of
this chapter. The agents and officers of the Alabama State Law
Enforcement Agency, the drug inspectors of the State Board of
Pharmacy, the investigators of the State Board of Medical
Examiners, the investigators of the Board of Dental Examiners,
the investigators of the Board of Nursing, and the drug and
narcotic agents and inspectors of the State Board of Health
shall have the powers of peace law enforcement officers in the
performance of their duties to:
"(1) Make arrests without warrant for any offense
under this chapter committed in their presence, or if they
have probable cause to believe that the person to be arrested
has committed or is committing a violation of this chapter
which may constitute a felony.
"(2) Make seizures of property pursuant to this
chapter.
"(3) Carry firearms in the performance of their
official duties.
"(b) Notwithstanding subdivision (1) of subsection
(a), the investigators of the Board of Nursing shall not have
the power to make arrests.
"(c) In addition to the requirements of subsection
(a), drug inspectors of the State Board of Pharmacy shall,
beginning October 1, 1993, meet the minimum standards required
of peace law enforcement officers in this state.
"ยง34-21-2.
"(a) There is created the Board of Nursing, which
shall be composed of 13 members to be appointed and have the
duties and powers enumerated in this section. The membership
of the board shall be inclusive and reflect the racial,
gender, geographic, urban/rural, and economic diversity of the
state. In order to insure continuity of administration, the
nine board members provided for by Section 3 of Act 427,
Regular Session 1975, shall continue to serve to the
completion of the term for which they are serving. The
Governor, within 60 days of January 1, 1984, shall appoint a
tenth member who shall be a licensed practical nurse for a
term of four years from a list of nominees furnished him or
her by the Alabama Federation of Licensed Practical Nurses,
Incorporated. As the terms of all board members expire, their
successors shall be appointed for terms of four years each.
Vacancies in unexpired terms shall be filled in the same
manner as original appointments are made. No member shall be
appointed to more than two consecutive terms of four years
each. Eight members of the board shall be licensed
professional nurses, and four members of the board shall be
licensed practical nurses.
"(b)(1) The Governor shall appoint the members of
the board who are licensed professional nurses from a list of
nominees who are selected by the Board of Nursing Nomination
Committee and furnished to the Governor by the Alabama State
Nurses' Association, and such list, when furnished, shall
contain at least twice the number of nominees as there are
appointments to be made or vacancies to be filled. The Alabama
State Nurses' Association, on or before December 1 of each
year, or at such other times as necessary, shall furnish the
Governor with a list of licensed professional nurses qualified
for appointment to the board. In the nominating and appointing
process, due care shall be taken to ensure the maintenance of
qualified representation from the fields of nursing education,
nursing administration, clinical nursing, and advanced
practice nursing.
"(2) The Governor shall appoint two of the members
of the board who are to be licensed practical nurses from a
list of nominees furnished him or her by the Board of
Directors of the Licensed Practical Nurses Association of
Alabama, and such list, when furnished, shall contain at least
twice the number of nominees for the vacancies to be filled.
The Board of Directors of the Licensed Practical Nurses
Association of Alabama, on or before December 1 of each year
in which the term of office of a board member or a nominee of
the Board of Directors shall expire, or at such other time as
necessary, shall furnish the Governor with such list of
licensed practical nurses qualified for appointment to the
board.
"(3) The Governor shall appoint two members on the
board who are to be licensed practical nurses from a list of
nominees furnished him or her by the Board of Directors of the
Alabama Federation of Licensed Practical Nurses, Incorporated,
and such list, when furnished, shall contain at least twice
the number of nominees for the vacancies to be filled. The
Board of Directors of the Alabama Federation of Licensed
Practical Nurses, Incorporated, on or before December 1 of
each year in which the term of office of the board member
filled by the nominee of such board of directors shall expire,
or at such other times as necessary, shall furnish the
Governor with a list of licensed practical nurses qualified
for appointment to the board.
"(c) The Governor may remove any member from the
board for neglect of duty of the board, incompetency, or
unprofessional or dishonorable conduct.
"(d) Each person appointed to the board as a
licensed professional nurse shall be a citizen of the United
States, a resident of the State of Alabama, and have all of
these additional qualifications:
"(1) Be a graduate of a state-approved educational
program for the preparation of practitioners of professional
nursing.
"(2) Be a currently licensed professional nurse in
Alabama.
"(3) Have a minimum of five years' successful
nursing experience in an administrative, teaching, clinical
capacity, or advanced practice.
"(4) Be actively engaged in professional nursing in
this state immediately preceding and during appointment.
"(e) Each person appointed to the board as a
licensed practical nurse shall be a citizen of the United
States, a resident of the State of Alabama, and have all of
these additional qualifications:
"(1) Hold a diploma from an accredited high school
or its equivalent.
"(2) Be a graduate of a state-approved vocational
educational program for the preparation of practitioners of
licensed practical nursing.
"(3) Be a currently licensed practical nurse in
Alabama.
"(4) Have a minimum of five years' successful
nursing experience.
"(5) Be actively engaged in licensed practical
nursing in this state immediately preceding and during
appointment.
"(f) There shall be one member of the board who is a
consumer and who is not a member of any of the health care
professions. The consumer member shall be appointed by the
Governor effective January 1, 1998, and shall serve for a term
of four years. His or her successor shall be appointed in a
like manner at the expiration of each term or upon a vacancy
for the remainder of an unexpired term of office. The consumer
member of the board shall have, presently or formerly, no
direct financial interest in any health care facility,
profession, agency, or insurer, or be or have been a health
care worker.
"(g) There shall be two advanced practice nurse
positions to be filled effective January 1, 1998, in the same
manner as all other professional nurse positions. One advanced
practice nurse position shall be served for an initial
five-year term and successors shall serve four-year terms. The
remaining member appointed to an advance practice nurse
position shall serve an initial four-year term and successors
shall serve four-year terms.
"(h) All members of the board shall enjoy immunity
from individual civil liability while acting within the scope
of their duties as board members.
"(i) The board shall have the following powers and
perform the following duties: It shall meet at least once a
year and shall, at its organizational meeting and at its
annual meetings thereafter, elect from its members a
president, a vice-president, and a secretary. It may hold such
other and additional meetings during any year as it deems
necessary for the transaction of business. A majority of the
board, including one officer, shall constitute a quorum at any
meeting.
"(j) The board may:
"(1) Adopt and, from time to time, revise such rules
and regulations, not inconsistent with law, as may be
necessary to carry out this chapter.
"(2) Prescribe standards and approve curricula for
nursing educational programs preparing persons for licensure
under this chapter.
"(3) Provide for surveys and evaluations of such
programs at such times as it may deem necessary.
"(4) Approve such nursing educational programs as
meet the requirements of this chapter and the board. Nothing
in this chapter shall be construed to diminish the power of
the State Board of Education or other constitutionally or
legislatively established state agencies to govern the schools
under their respective jurisdictions.
"(5) Deny or withdraw approval from educational
programs for failure to meet prescribed standards. Withdrawal
of approval shall be effected only after a hearing in
accordance with board rules and regulations.
"(6) Examine, license, and renew the licenses of
duly qualified applicants and require employers to submit
listings of personnel covered by this chapter to the board
upon request.
"(7) Conduct investigations, hearings, and
proceedings concerning alleged violations of this section or
of the rules and regulations of the board.
"(8) Have the power to issue subpoenas, compel the
attendance of witnesses, and administer oaths to persons
giving testimony at hearings.
"(9) Cause the prosecution of all persons violating
this chapter and incur such necessary expenses therefor.
"(10) Expunge, for purposes of public disclosure,
records of prior disciplinary actions taken against licensees.
"(10)(11) Keep a public record of all of its
proceedings.
"(11)(12) Keep a register of all licensees.
"(12)(13) Make an annual report to the Governor.
"(13)(14) Appoint and employ a qualified person, not
subject to the state Merit System, who shall not be a member
of the board, to serve as executive officer.
"(14)(15) Define the duties and fix the compensation
for the executive officer.
"(15)(16) Employ such other persons as may be
necessary to carry on the work of the board and provide for
appropriate bonding of employees. Regular employees of the
board shall be employed subject to the state Merit System in
effect on January 1, 1966, or at the time of employment.
"(16)(17) Employ consultants, specialists, counsel,
or other specially qualified persons under contract or on a
part-time basis to assist it in administering this chapter and
without regard to the state Merit System in effect on or after
January 1, 1966, and pay for the services of such persons.
"(17)(18) Accept gifts and grants upon terms and
conditions imposed by it through official resolutions.
"(18)(19) Perform such other duties, not
inconsistent with law, as required by this chapter to foster
and improve nursing and the regulation thereof and the public
health of this state.
"(19)(20) Expend funds of the board in exercising
its powers and duties and in administering this chapter.
"(20)(21) Determine and collect reasonable fees.
"(21)(22) Adopt standards for registered and
practical nursing practice and for continued competency of
licensees.
"(22)(23) Join organizations that develop and
regulate the national nursing licensure examinations and
promote the improvement of the legal standards of the practice
of nursing for the protection of the public health, safety,
and welfare.
"(k) The executive officer employed by the board
shall be a citizen of the United States, a person of the
highest integrity, and possess these additional
qualifications: Be a licensed professional nurse in Alabama or
eligible for licensure, be a graduate of a professional
nursing program approved by the state in which the program was
completed, hold a master's degree, and have had a varied
experience in nursing, including at least five years'
experience in an administrative or teaching capacity.
"(l) The executive officer shall be bonded for the
faithful performance of the duties of the office in the sum of
not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000), and the premium
of the bond shall be paid out of the funds of the board.
"(m) Each member of the board shall receive the same
per diem and travel allowance as is paid by law to state
employees for each day's attendance at the board meetings
incurred in the discharge of his or her duties as a board
member in addition to any daily compensation or allowance, if
any, as may be provided by the board, in such amount as may be
determined by the board. Any member of the board engaged in
duties under the direction of the board shall receive the per
diem and travel expenses and daily compensation or allowance
authorized by the board.
"(n)(1) Except as provided in subdivision (2),
investigators employed by the board who comply with the
Alabama Peace Officers' Minimum Standards and Training Act
shall have the authority of a law enforcement officer,
including the authority to inspect documents and to enforce
laws involving an alleged violation of this chapter or an
alleged violation of Chapter 2 of Title 20, when the alleged
violation is committed by a licensed nurse or by an applicant
for licensure as a nurse.
"(2) The investigators shall not have the power to
make arrests.
"(3) The officers shall not be entitled to overtime
compensation pursuant to Sections 36-21-4 and 36-21-5 or to
compensation pursuant to the requirements of Section 36-21-13.
"(o) Nothing in this chapter shall limit the rights
of affected parties to appeal decisions of the board with
regard to rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this
chapter."
Section 2. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.