SB79
182173-3
By Senator Pittman (N & P)
RFD: Local Legislation
First Read: 07-FEB-17
SB79
With Notice and Proof
ENROLLED, An Act,
Relating to Baldwin County; to amend Section
45-2-244.044 of the Code of Alabama 1975, to authorize the
county commission of Baldwin County to levy an excise tax on
the business of selling, distributing, storing, or withdrawing
from storage, for any purpose whatsoever, gasoline or motor
fuel and substitutes in the county not to exceed three cents
($.03) per gallon.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Section 45-2-244.044, Code of Alabama
1975, is hereby amended to read as follows:
"ยง45-2-244.044.
"(a) After January 1, 1995, the county commission is
authorized to levy two separate and distinct taxes each in the
amount of one cent ($.01) per gallon on persons, corporations,
copartnerships, companies, agencies, and associations engaged
in the business of selling, distributing, storing, or
withdrawing from storage, for any purpose whatever, gasoline
and motor fuel and substitutes therefor in the county. The tax
shall parallel the state excise tax on gasoline and motor fuel
and shall be collected in the same manner.
"(b) Effective October 1, 2018, the county
commission is authorized to levy an additional tax not to
exceed three cents ($.03) per gallon on persons, corporations,
copartnerships, companies, agencies, and associations engaged
in the business of selling, distributing, storing, or
withdrawing from storage, for any purpose whatever, gasoline
and motor fuel and substitutes therefor in the county. The tax
shall parallel the state excise tax on gasoline and motor fuel
and shall be levied and collected in the same manner as the
tax authorized in subsection (a). The net proceeds of any tax
levied pursuant to this subsection shall be deposited in the
special fund and the funds shall all be expended on a
pay-as-you-go basis and not pledged for any bonded
indebtedness. The funds shall generally be expended for the
same purposes as the special fund except one-fouth of the net
proceeds shall be distributed on a proportional basis to the
organized and active municipalities in the county based on the
percent that the population of each organized and active
municipality in the county bears to the total population of
all organized and active municipalities in the county to be
used by the municipality for the purposes of the fund."
Section 2. This act shall become effective
immediately following its passage and approval by the
Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.
President and Presiding Officer of the Senate
Speaker of the House of Representatives
SB79
Senate 14-FEB-17
I hereby certify that the within Act originated in and passed
the Senate, as amended.
Patrick Harris,
Secretary.
House of Representatives
Passed: 09-MAR-17
By: Senator Pittman