SB30
178654-1
By Senator Whatley
RFD: Transportation and Energy
First Read: 07-FEB-17
PFD: 01/30/2017
178654-1:n:07/07/2016:FC/tj LRS2016-2278
SYNOPSIS:           Under existing law, if the Alabama State Law
Enforcement Agency determines administratively that
a person was driving under the influence and the
offender's driving record shows no prior alcohol or
drug-related enforcement contacts during the
immediately preceding five years, the offender's
driving privilege is suspended for 90 days.
This bill would provide that the suspension
would be stayed if the offender elects to have an
approved ignition interlock device installed on his
or her designated motor vehicle.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
To amend Section 32-5A-304 of the Code of Alabama
1975, relating to the administrative suspension by the Alabama
State Law Enforcement Agency of a person's driving privilege
if the person was driving under the influence; to provide for
the stay of the suspension under certain conditions for
persons without a recent alcohol or drug-related enforcement
contact if the offender elects to have an approved ignition
interlock device installed on his or her designated vehicle.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Section 32-5A-304 of the Code of Alabama
1975, is amended to read as follows:
"ยง32-5A-304.
"(a) A driving privilege suspension shall become
effective 45 days after the person has received a notice of
intended suspension as provided in Section 32-5A-303, or is
deemed to have received a notice of suspension by mail as
provided in Section 32-5A-302 if no notice of intended
suspension was served.
"(b) The period of driving privilege suspension
under this section shall be as follows:
"(1) Ninety days if the driving record of a person
shows no prior alcohol or drug-related enforcement contacts
during the immediately preceding five years. Notwithstanding
the other provisions of this section, the suspension imposed
pursuant to this subdivision shall be stayed if the offender
elects to have an approved ignition interlock device installed
and operating on the designated motor vehicle driven by the
offender for six months. The offender shall present proof of
installation of the approved ignition interlock device to the
Alabama State Law Enforcement Agency and obtain an ignition
interlock restricted driver license. The remainder of the
suspension shall be commuted upon the successful completion of
the elected use of the ignition interlock device.
"(2) One year if the driving record of a person
shows one prior alcohol or drug-related enforcement contact
during the immediately preceding five years.
"(3) Three years if the driving record of a person
shows two or three alcohol or drug-related enforcement
contacts during the immediately preceding five years.
"(4) Five years if the driving record of a person
shows four or more alcohol or drug-related enforcement
contacts during the immediately preceding five years.
"(5) For purposes of this section, "alcohol or
drug-related enforcement contacts" shall include all
suspensions under this article, any suspension or revocation
entered in this or any other state for a refusal to submit to
chemical testing under an implied consent law, and any
conviction in this or any other state for a violation which
involves driving a motor vehicle while having an unlawful
percent of alcohol in the blood, or while under the influence
of alcohol or drugs, or alcohol and drugs except that no more
than one alcohol or drug-related contact on any one DUI arrest
may be considered by the agency in determining the period of
suspension.
"(c) If a license is suspended under this section
for having .08 or more by weight of alcohol in the blood of
the person and the person is also convicted on criminal
charges arising out of the same occurrence for a violation of
Section 32-5A-191, the suspension under this section shall be
imposed, giving credit for suspension time served toward the
duration of suspension or revocation required under Section
32-5A-191. If a license is suspended under this section for
having .08 or more by weight of alcohol in the blood of the
person and the criminal charge against the person for
violation of Section 32-5A-191 is dismissed, nolle prossed, or
the person is acquitted of the charge, the director shall
rescind the suspension order and remove the administrative
suspension from the person's driving record, except for those
persons holding a commercial driver license, a commercial
learner license, or a person operating a commercial motor
vehicle."
Section 2. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.