SB82
176132-1
By Senators Pittman and Ward
RFD: Judiciary
First Read: 07-FEB-17
176132-1:n:03/22/2016:KBH/tj LRS2016-1263
SYNOPSIS:          This bill would establish the Marshall James
Walton Highway Safety Act and would create the
crime of homicide by vehicle or vessel.
This bill would provide that a person is
guilty of homicide by vehicle or vessel if the
person causes the death of another person while
knowingly engaged in the violation of any state law
or municipal ordinance applying to the operation or
use of a vehicle, a vessel, or to the regulation of
traffic or boating, if the violation is the
proximate cause of the death.
This bill would provide criminal penalties.
Amendment 621 of the Constitution of Alabama
of 1901, now appearing as Section 111.05 of the
Official Recompilation of the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, as amended, prohibits a general
law whose purpose or effect would be to require a
new or increased expenditure of local funds from
becoming effective with regard to a local
governmental entity without enactment by a 2/3 vote
unless: it comes within one of a number of
specified exceptions; it is approved by the
affected entity; or the Legislature appropriates
funds, or provides a local source of revenue, to
the entity for the purpose.
The purpose or effect of this bill would be
to require a new or increased expenditure of local
funds within the meaning of the amendment. However,
the bill does not require approval of a local
governmental entity or enactment by a 2/3 vote to
become effective because it comes within one of the
specified exceptions contained in the amendment.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
Relating to homicide; to establish the Marshall
James Walton Highway Safety Act; to create the crime of
homicide by vehicle or vessel under certain conditions; to
provide criminal penalties; and in connection therewith to
have as its purpose or effect the requirement of a new or
increased expenditure of local funds within the meaning of
Amendment 621 of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, now
appearing as Section 111.05 of the Official Recompilation of
the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as amended.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. This act may be cited as the Marshall
James Walton Highway Safety Act.
Section 2. (a) A person who causes the death of
another person while knowingly engaged in the violation of any
state law or municipal ordinance applying to the operation or
use of a vehicle, as defined in Section 32-1-1.1 of the Code
of Alabama 1975, or a vessel, as defined in Section 33-5-3 of
the Code of Alabama 1975, or to the regulation of traffic or
boating, shall be guilty of homicide by vehicle or vessel when
the violation is the proximate cause of the death.
(b) A person convicted of homicide by vehicle or
vessel under subsection (a) is guilty of a Class C felony.
Section 3. Although this bill would have as its
purpose or effect the requirement of a new or increased
expenditure of local funds, the bill is excluded from further
requirements and application under Amendment 621, now
appearing as Section 111.05 of the Official Recompilation of
the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as amended, because the
bill defines a new crime or amends the definition of an
existing crime.
Section 4. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.