HB304
181709-2
By Representative Scott
RFD: Judiciary
First Read: 23-FEB-17
181709-2:n:02/14/2017:PMG/cj LRS2017-428R1
SYNOPSIS:             Under existing law, elder abuse and neglect
and financial exploitation of an elderly person are
crimes.
This bill would establish the Elder Abuse
Protection Order and Enforcement Act.
This bill would provide for the issuance of
elder abuse protection orders to provide greater
protection and assistance to victims of elder
abuse.
This bill would define elder abuse and other
terms.
This bill would authorize certain
individuals in addition to the victim to petition
for an elder abuse protection order.
This bill would provide penalties for
violating an elder abuse protection order.
Amendment 621 of the Constitution of Alabama
of 1901, now appearing as Section 111.05 of the
Official Recompilation of the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, as amended, prohibits a general
law whose purpose or effect would be to require a
new or increased expenditure of local funds from
becoming effective with regard to a local
governmental entity without enactment by a 2/3 vote
unless: it comes within one of a number of
specified exceptions; it is approved by the
affected entity; or the Legislature appropriates
funds, or provides a local source of revenue, to
the entity for the purpose.
The purpose or effect of this bill would be
to require a new or increased expenditure of local
funds within the meaning of the amendment. However,
the bill does not require approval of a local
governmental entity or enactment by a 2/3 vote to
become effective because it comes within one of the
specified exceptions contained in the amendment.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
Relating to elder abuse; to amend Section 15-10-3,
Code of Alabama 1975; to establish the Elder Abuse Protection
Order and Enforcement Act; to provide for the issuance of
elder abuse protection orders; to define terms; to authorize
certain individuals in addition to the victim to petition for
an elder abuse protection order; to provide penalties for
violating an elder abuse protection order; and in connection
therewith would have as its purpose or effect the requirement
of a new or increased expenditure of local funds within the
meaning of Amendment 621 of the Constitution of Alabama of
1901, now appearing as Section 111.05 of the Official
Recompilation of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as
amended.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Sections 1 to 11, inclusive, shall be
known and may be cited as the Elder Abuse Protection Order and
Enforcement Act.
Section 2. Sections 1 to 11, inclusive, shall be
liberally construed and applied to promote all of the
following purposes:
(1) To maximize protection of victims of elder
abuse.
(2) To create a flexible and expeditious method of
obtaining a protection order against an individual who has
committed elder abuse.
(3) To expand the ability of law enforcement
officers to assist victims, to enforce the law effectively in
cases of elder abuse, and to prevent further incidents of
abuse.
Section 3. For purposes of Sections 1 to 11,
inclusive, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
(1) CAREGIVER. The term as defined in Section
13A-6-191, Code of Alabama 1975.
(2) ELDER ABUSE. The commission of any of the
following acts or the intent to commit any of the following
acts against an elderly person:
a. Abuse, as defined in Section 38-9-2, Code of
Alabama 1975.
b. Arson, as defined in Sections 13A-7-40 to
13A-7-43, inclusive, Code of Alabama 1975.
c. Assault, as defined in Sections 13A-6-20 to
13A-6-22, inclusive, Code of Alabama 1975.
d. Criminal coercion, as defined in Section 13A-6-25
Code of Alabama 1975.
e. Criminal trespass as defined in Sections 13A-7-2
to 13A-7-4.1, inclusive, Code of Alabama 1975.
f. Emotional abuse, as defined in Section 13A-6-191,
Code of Alabama 1975.
g. Financial exploitation, as defined in Section
13A-6-191, Code of Alabama 1975.
h. Harassment, as defined in Section 13A-11-8, Code
of Alabama 1975.
i. Kidnapping, as defined in Sections 13A-6-43 and
13A-6-44, Code of Alabama 1975.
j. Menacing, as defined in Section 13A-6-23, Code of
Alabama 1975.
k. Reckless endangerment, as defined in Section
13A-6-24, Code of Alabama 1975.
l. Sexual abuse, as defined as any of the acts in
Sections 13A-6-60 to 13A-6-68, Code of Alabama 1975.
m. Stalking, as defined in Sections 13A-6-90 to
13A-6-91.1, inclusive, Code of Alabama 1975.
n. Theft, as defined in Sections 13A-8-2 to 13A-8-5,
inclusive, Code of Alabama 1975.
o. Unlawful imprisonment, as defined in Sections
13A-6-41 and 13A-6-42, Code of Alabama 1975.
(3) ELDER ABUSE PROTECTION ORDER or PROTECTION
ORDER. An order issued pursuant to Sections 1 to 11,
inclusive, including all of the following:
a. A restraining order, injunctive order, or order
of release from custody issued by a circuit, district,
municipal, or probate court that seeks to protect an elderly
person.
b. An order issued by a circuit, district, or
municipal court that places conditions on the pre-trial
release of a defendant in a criminal case, which may include
provisions of bail pursuant to Section 15-13-190, Code of
Alabama 1975, that seeks to protect an elderly person.
(4) ELDERLY PERSON. A person 60 years of age or
older.
(5) PLAINTIFF. An elderly person in need of
protection from elder abuse.
(6) THREAT. Any word or action, expressed or
implied, made to cause a plaintiff to fear for his or her
safety or for the safety of another person.
(7) VIOLATION. The knowing commission of any act or
conduct prohibited by an elder abuse protection order or any
willful failure to abide by its terms.
Section 4. (a) The following courts shall have
jurisdiction to issue elder abuse protection orders under this
act:
(1) Circuit courts.
(2) A special circuit court judge appointed pursuant
to Section 12-1-14 or 12-1-14.1, Code of Alabama 1975.
(3) A district court judge designated by a written
standing order from the presiding circuit court judge.
(b) An elder abuse protection order may be requested
in any pending civil or domestic relations action, as an
independent civil action, or in connection with the
preliminary, final, or post-judgment relief in a civil action.
(c) A petition for an elder abuse protection order
may be filed in any of the following locations:
(1) Where the plaintiff or defendant resides.
(2) Where the plaintiff is temporarily located if he
or she has left his or her residence to avoid further abuse.
(3) Where the abuse occurred.
(d) There is no minimum period of residence for the
plaintiff in the State of Alabama or in the county in which a
case is filed.
(e) An elder abuse protection order shall be a
status order that is specifically designed to protect the
elderly person, and in personam jurisdiction over the
defendant shall not be required in order to issue an ex parte
or final order under this act.
Section 5. (a) The plaintiff's right to relief under
this act shall not be affected by his or her leaving the
residence or household to avoid further abuse.
(b) The remedies and procedures provided in this act
are in addition to and no in lieu of any other judicial
protection actions that may be initiated by the victim in any
other forum.
(c) Any elder abuse protection order issued in this
state shall be effective and enforceable in every county and
jurisdiction in this state.
(d) An order issued by a court of another state,
tribal nation, or territory that provides the relief or
protection similar to an elder abuse protection order under
Sections 1 to 11, inclusive, shall be accorded full faith and
credit and enforced as if it were an order of this state.
Section 6. (a) If a plaintiff lacks the physical or
mental capacity to seek protection for himself or herself, the
following may file a sworn petition for relief on behalf of
the plaintiff:
(1) A court appointed guardian. The petition must
include a copy of the court order appointing the petitioner as
the plaintiff's guardian.
(2) A court appointed conservator. The petition must
include a copy of the court order appointing the petitioner as
the plaintiff's conservator.
(3) A temporary guardian appointed pursuant to
Section 26-2A-107, Code of Alabama 1975. The petition must
include a copy of the court order appointing the petitioner as
the plaintiff's temporary guardian.
(4) An agent, co-agent, or successor agent appointed
under the plaintiff's validly executed power of attorney who
acts within the authority of the power of attorney. The
petition shall include a copy of the power of attorney.
(5) A health care proxy appointed under the
plaintiff's validly executed Advance Directive for Health
Care, or similar document, who acts within the authority of
the designation. The petition shall include a copy of the
Advance Directive for Health Care or similar document.
(6) An interested person who has the authority to
petition for protective placement or other protective services
under Section 38-9-6, Code of Alabama 1975.
(b) A sworn petition shall allege the incidents of
abuse and the specific facts and circumstances that form the
basis upon which relief is sought.
(c) Standardized petitions for actions pursuant to
this act shall be made available through the circuit clerk's
offices throughout the state. A circuit clerk shall not be
required to provide assistance to individuals in completing
the forms or in presenting the petitioner's case to the court.
(d) The elderly person for whom the petition is
filed must be served with the petition pursuant to the Alabama
Rules of Civil Procedure.
(e) The court may not assess court costs or other
fees for the filing or service of a petition or the issuance
of a witness subpoena under this act against a petitioner or
plaintiff. Costs and fees may be assessed against the
defendant at the discretion of the court.
Section 7. (a) The court shall hold a hearing after
the filing of a petition under this act upon the request of
the defendant or within 10 days of the perfection of service.
A final hearing shall be set at which the standard of proof
shall be a preponderance of the evidence. If the defendant has
not been served, a final hearing may be continued to allow for
service to be perfected.
(b) The court may enter such temporary ex parte
protection orders as it deems necessary to protect the
plaintiff from abuse. The court shall grant or deny a petition
for a temporary ex parte protection order filed under this act
within three business days of the filing of the petition. Any
granted temporary ex parte protection order shall be effective
until the final hearing date.
(c) If a final hearing under subsection (a) is
continued, the court may make or extend temporary ex parte
protection orders under subsection (b) as it deems reasonably
necessary.
Section 8. (a) If it appears from a petition for an
elder abuse protection order or a petition to modify an elder
abuse protection order that elder abuse has occurred or a
modification is warranted, the court may do either of the
following:
(1) Without notice or hearing, immediately issue an
ex parte elder abuse protection order or modify an ex parte
elder abuse protection order as it deems necessary.
(2) After providing notice as required by the
Alabama Rules of Civil Procedure, issue an elder abuse
protection order or modify an elder abuse protection order
after a hearing whether or not the defendant appears.
(b) Based upon a risk of imminent potential harm to
the plaintiff, a court may grant one or more of the following
ex parte forms of relief without prior notice to the defendant
or a hearing:
(1) Enjoin the defendant from threatening to commit
or committing acts of elder abuse against the plaintiff and
any other individual designated by the court.
(2) Restrain and enjoin the defendant from
harassing, stalking, annoying, telephoning, contacting, or
otherwise communicating, either directly or indirectly, with
the plaintiff or threatening or engaging in conduct that would
place the plaintiff or any other individual designated by the
court in reasonable fear of bodily injury.
(3) Order the defendant to stay away from the
plaintiff's residence, place of employment, or any specified
place frequented by the plaintiff that the defendant has no
legitimate reason to frequent.
(4) Remove and exclude the defendant from the
residence of the plaintiff, regardless of ownership of the
residence.
(5) Order possession and use of an automobile or
other essential personal effects, regardless of ownership, and
direct the appropriate law enforcement officer to accompany
the plaintiff to the residence of the plaintiff or other
specified locations as necessary to protect the plaintiff from
abuse.
(6) Prohibit the defendant from transferring,
concealing, encumbering, or otherwise disposing of specified
property mutually owned or leased by the parties or in which
the plaintiff had an ownership interest within the last 12
months.
(7) Prohibit the defendant from transferring the
funds, benefits, property, resources, belongings, or assets of
the plaintiff to any person other than the plaintiff.
(8) Direct the defendant to refrain from exercising
control over the funds, benefits, property, resources,
belongings, or assets of the plaintiff.
(9) Require the defendant to provide an accounting
of the disposition of the plaintiff's income and other
resources, and of the plaintiff's debts and expenses.
(10) Restrain the defendant from exercising any
powers the defendant has been granted as the plaintiff's agent
under power of attorney.
(11) Require the defendant to comply with the
instructions of the plaintiff's guardian, conservator, or
agent under power of attorney.
(12) Order other relief as it deems necessary to
provide for the safety and welfare of the plaintiff and any
individual designated by the court.
(c) The court may grant one or more of the following
forms of relief in a final order after notice and hearing:
(1) Grant the relief available in subsection (b).
(2) Require the defendant to return custody or
control of the funds, benefits, property, resources,
belongings, or assets to the plaintiff.
(3) Order restitution.
(4) Prohibit the defendant from possessing a firearm
or other weapon specified by the court, except when the weapon
is necessary for employment as a law enforcement officer or
military personnel.
(5) Order the defendant to pay attorneys' fees and
court costs.
(d) Any temporary ex parte protection order issued
pursuant to this act shall remain in effect until the final
order is entered.
(e) Any final elder abuse protection order shall be
of permanent duration unless otherwise specified by the court.
(f) An elder abuse protection order may not affect
in any manner title to real property.
Section 9. (a) A copy of an elder abuse protection
order shall be issued to the plaintiff, the defendant, and the
law enforcement officials with jurisdiction to enforce the
protection order.
(b) If the defendant is appointed as the plaintiff's
guardian or conservator, a copy of any protection order shall
be issued to the court that made the appointment.
(c) Ex parte and final elder abuse protection orders
shall be in a format as provided by the Administrative Office
of Courts. If a court wishes to provide additional information
in these standardized court orders, the court may attach
additional pages containing this additional information.
Section 10. (a) A violation of an elder abuse
protection order is a Class A misdemeanor, which shall be
punishable as provided in law.
(b) A second conviction for a violation of an elder
abuse protection order, in addition to any other penalty or
fine, shall be punishable by a minimum of 30 days
imprisonment, which may not be suspended. A third or
subsequent conviction, in addition to any other penalties or
fines, shall be punishable by a minimum sentence of 120 days
imprisonment, which may not be suspended.
Section 11. A law enforcement officer may arrest any
person for a violation of Sections 1 to 11, inclusive, if the
officer has probable cause to believe that the person has
violated any provision of a valid elder abuse protection
order, whether temporary or permanent. The presentation of an
elder abuse protection order constitutes probable cause for an
officer to believe that a valid order exists. For purposes of
Sections 1 to 11, inclusive, the elder abuse protection order
may be inscribed on a tangible copy or may be stored in an
electronic or other medium if it is retrievable in a
detectable form. Presentation of a certified copy of the elder
abuse protection order is not required for enforcement or to
allow a law enforcement officer to effect a warrantless
arrest. If an elder abuse protection order is not presented to
or otherwise confirmed by a law enforcement officer, the
officer may consider other information in determining whether
there is probable cause to believe that a valid protection
order exists. The law enforcement officer may arrest the
defendant without a warrant although he or she did not
personally see the violation. Knowledge by the officer of the
existence or contents of, or both, or presentation to the
officer by the complainant of, an elder abuse protection order
shall constitute prima facie evidence of the validity of the
order. If a law enforcement officer determines that an
otherwise valid elder abuse protection order cannot be
enforced because the defendant has not been notified or served
with the protection order, the law enforcement officer shall
inform the defendant of the order and allow the person a
reasonable opportunity to comply with the order's provisions
before enforcing the order. In the event the law enforcement
officer provides notice of the elder abuse protection order to
the defendant, the officer shall document this fact in the
written report.
Section 12. Section 15-10-3, Code of Alabama 1975,
is amended to read as follows:
"ยง15-10-3.
"(a) An officer may arrest a person without a
warrant, on any day and at any time in any of the following
instances:
"(1) If a public offense has been committed or a
breach of the peace threatened in the presence of the officer.
"(2) When a felony has been committed, though not in
the presence of the officer, by the person arrested.
"(3) When a felony has been committed and the
officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person
arrested committed the felony.
"(4) When the officer has reasonable cause to
believe that the person arrested has committed a felony,
although it may afterwards appear that a felony had not in
fact been committed.
"(5) When a charge has been made, upon reasonable
cause, that the person arrested has committed a felony.
"(6) When the officer has actual knowledge that a
warrant for the person's arrest for the commission of a felony
or misdemeanor has been issued, provided the warrant was
issued in accordance with this chapter. However, upon request
the officer shall show the warrant to the arrested person as
soon as possible. If the officer does not have the warrant in
his or her possession at the time of arrest the officer shall
inform the defendant of the offense charged and of the fact
that a warrant has been issued.
"(7) When the officer has reasonable cause to
believe that a felony or misdemeanor has been committed by the
person arrested in violation of a protection order, including
a domestic violence protection order or an elder abuse
protection order, issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
"(8) When an offense involves domestic violence as
defined in Section 13A-6-139.1 or elder abuse as defined in
Section 3 of the act adding this amendatory language, and the
arrest is based on probable cause, regardless of whether the
offense is a felony or misdemeanor.
"(b) When a law enforcement officer investigates an
allegation of domestic violence or elder abuse, whether or not
an arrest is made, the officer shall make a written report of
the alleged incident, including a statement of the complaint,
and the disposition of the case.
"(c) If the defendant is arrested under this section
for committing an act of domestic violence in violation of a
domestic violence protection order or an act of elder abuse in
violation of an elder abuse protection order, the defendant
shall be held in custody until brought before the court as
expeditiously as possible for the purpose of enforcing the
protection order and for consideration of bail in accordance
with Section 15-13-190 and the applicable rules of criminal
procedure, pending a hearing."
Section 13. Although this bill would have as its
purpose or effect the requirement of a new or increased
expenditure of local funds, the bill is excluded from further
requirements and application under Amendment 621, now
appearing as Section 111.05 of the Official Recompilation of
the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as amended, because the
bill defines a new crime or amends the definition of an
existing crime.
Section 14. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.