HB305
183614-4
By Representatives Fridy, Farley, Faulkner, Hill and Pettus
RFD: Public Safety and Homeland Security
First Read: 23-FEB-17
ENGROSSED
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
To amend Section 32-10-7, Code of Alabama 1975,
relating to motor vehicles; to provide that the Alabama State
Law Enforcement Agency may disclose motor vehicle accident
reports under certain circumstances.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Section 32-10-7, Code of Alabama 1975, is
amended to read as follows:
"ยง32-10-7.
"(a) Every law enforcement officer who in the
regular course of duty investigates a motor vehicle accident,
either at the time of and at the scene of the accident or
thereafter by interviewing participants or witnesses, shall,
within 24 hours after completing such investigation, forward
the necessary completed written report or copy thereof of such
accident to the director on the uniform accident report form
supplied by the director.
"(b) Accident reports filed with the Alabama State
Law Enforcement Agency pursuant to this section shall be made
available to a news-gathering organization solely for the
purpose of publishing or broadcasting the news. The
news-gathering organization shall not use or distribute the
report, or knowingly allow its use or distribution, for a
commercial purpose other than the news-gathering
organization's publication or broadcasting of the information
in the report. A newspaper, periodical, or radio or television
station shall not be held to have used or knowingly allowed
the use of the report for a commercial purpose merely because
of its publication or broadcast. The news-gathering
organization shall not distribute the report or any of the
contents of the report, including personal information
contained in the report, to any third party for any other
purpose. For 30 days following the accident, the Alabama State
Law Enforcement Agency shall limit any personal identifying
information contained in any accident report released pursuant
to this subsection to the name and age of the person involved.
The complete report shall be made available after that date.
Disclosure of the full report shall be made immediately under
the following circumstances:
"(1) When the identity of a person involved in an
accident is not otherwise known or when he or she denies his
or her presence at an accident.
"(2) When disclosure is directed by a properly
executed subpoena or court order.
"(3) When requested by any of the following persons:
"a. A person involved in the accident made the basis
of the accident report, including, but not limited to, drivers
of and passengers in the automobiles and pedestrians involved
in the accident that is the subject of the report.
"b. A parent or guardian of a minor who is a person
involved in the accident made the basis of the accident
report.
"c. A personal representative, executor, or other
legal representative of the estate of a deceased person who
was involved in the accident made the basis of the accident
report. Where no personal representative has been appointed by
a probate court of competent jurisdiction regarding the
probate or administration of the estate of a decedent, any
heir of the decedent, shall be authorized to receive an
accident report. The authority of the heir to act on behalf of
the decedent shall terminate upon the appointment of a
personal representative of the estate of the decedent. The
Alabama State Law Enforcement Agency may rely upon the
affidavit of the heir stating that he or she meets the
requirements of this section, and that a personal
representative has not been appointed by a probate court with
respect to the estate of the decedent. For purposes of this
section, "heir" means a person who is entitled to a
distribution from the estate of an intestate decedent or a
person who would be entitled to a distribution from the estate
of a testate decedent if that decedent had died intestate.
"d. An insurer or its written designee of a person
involved in the accident made the basis of the accident
report, if the purpose of the request is for insurance
business purposes.
"e. An attorney of a person involved in the accident
made the basis of the accident report.
"f. A governmental entity responsible for
maintenance, repair, and oversight of the public road or
bridge on which the accident occurred.
"g. An owner or lienholder of an automobile in the
accident that is the subject of the report.
"(c) Except as provided for in this subsection, the
department shall not release accident reports for a commercial
purpose. The department may, as a matter of public safety,
contract with an outside entity and release vehicle damage
data extracted from accident reports to such an entity if the
data is used solely for the purpose of providing the public a
means of determining a vehicle's accident history. The
department may contract with a third party to provide
electronic access to reports for persons and entities who are
entitled to such reports under subsection (b)."
Section 2. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.
House of Representatives
Read for the first time and re-
ferred to the House of Representa-
tives committee on Public Safety
and Homeland Security..............    ....... 23-FEB-17
Read for the second time and placed
on the calendar with 1 substitute
and................................    ....... 09-MAR-17
Read for the third time and passed
as amended.........................    ....... 06-APR-17
Yeas 98, Nays 1, Abstains 1
Jeff Woodard
Clerk