SB297
181329-1
By Senator Livingston
RFD: Fiscal Responsibility and Economic Development
First Read: 09-MAR-17
181329-1:n:01/17/2017:CMH/th LRS2017-160
SYNOPSIS:           Under existing child labor law, the fee for
a Class I or Class II Child Labor Certificate
issued by the Department of Labor is $15 annually.
This bill would increase the fee for a Class
I or Class II Child Labor Certificate to $25
annually.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
To amend Section 25-8-45, Code of Alabama 1975,
relating to child labor laws; to increase the fee for a Class
I or Class II Child Labor Certificate to $25 annually.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Section 25-8-45 is amended to read as
follows:
"ยง25-8-45.
"(a) No person under 16 years of age shall engage in
any occupation mentioned in Section 25-8-39 unless he or she
has secured and has with him or her an eligibility to work
form as provided in this chapter.
"(b) No person, entity, franchise, corporation, or
division of a corporation shall employ, permit, or suffer to
work any person 14 or 15 years of age in any occupation,
except in agricultural service, unless the person, entity,
franchise, corporation, or division of a corporation procures
and keeps on file for the inspection by the officials charged
with the enforcement of this chapter, an eligibility to work
form for every person 14 or 15 years of age and a complete
list of those persons 14 or 15 years of age employed therein.
"(c) Any person, entity, franchise, corporation, or
division of a corporation that wishes to employ, permit, or
suffer to work any minor 14 or 15 years of age in any
occupation, except in agricultural service, shall obtain a
Class I Child Labor Certificate from the department for each
location where a person, entity, franchise, corporation, or
division of a corporation wishes to employ a minor 14 or 15
years of age. Such employment shall be in accordance with all
other sections of this chapter.
"(d) The certificate shall allow the employment of
minors 14 or 15 years of age to work only outside of school
hours or during vacation periods and only in occupations not
prohibited by this chapter for persons of these ages.
"(e) The employment of a minor 14 or 15 years of age
shall be revoked or suspended by the department if the minor's
regular school attendance and performance record is not
satisfactory to the head administrator or, if home schooled an
instructor, of the school which the minor attends. The
revocation or suspension shall be processed by the department
upon notification by the school.
"(f) Any person, entity, franchise, corporation, or
division of a corporation that wishes to employ, permit, or
suffer to work any minor 16 or 17 years of age in any
occupation, except in agricultural service, shall obtain a
Class II Child Labor Certificate from the department for each
location where a person, entity, franchise, corporation, or
division of a corporation wishes to employ a minor 16 or 17
years of age. Such employment shall be in accordance with all
other sections of this chapter.
"(g) The department shall issue Class I and Class II
Child Labor Certificates to any person, entity, franchise,
corporation, or division of a corporation that applies to the
department. The fee for a Class I or Class II Child Labor
Certificate shall be fifteen dollars ($15) twenty-five dollars
($25). The certificates shall be issued annually.
"(h)(1) The application for the child labor
certificate shall contain all of the following information
specific to the location of the minor's employment:
"a. The name, address, and telephone number of the
person, entity, franchise, corporation, or division of a
corporation that wishes to employ, permit, or suffer to work
any minor.
"b. The type of business or entity, the federal
employer identification number, the names of all
incorporators, owners, members, or partners of the business or
entity.
"c. Any other information as required by department
regulation.
"(2) The Class I and Class II Child Labor
Certificates shall contain all of the following information:
"a. The name of the employer.
"b. The type of business the employer maintains.
"c. Any other information as required by department
regulation.
"(3) If a person, entity, franchise, corporation, or
division of a corporation, employs a minor between 14 and 17
years of age without a proper child labor certificate, the
person, entity, franchise, corporation, or division of a
corporation shall pay a penalty of fifty dollars ($50) and
then shall obtain a certificate in the proper manner."
Section 2. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.