SB391
181691-5
By Senator McClendon
RFD: Judiciary
First Read: 20-APR-17
181691-5:n:04/04/2017:FC/tgw LRS2017-443R4
SYNOPSIS:          This bill would relate to persons charged
with driving under the influence and the
installation of ignition interlock devices on
vehicles.
This bill would: Require each person
approved for a pretrial diversion program to be
required to have an ignition interlock device
installed for a certain period of time; provide
that a portion of the court fee would be
distributed to the municipal court if the case is a
municipal court case when the person is ordered or
agrees to have an ignition interlock device; delete
the requirement for indigents to pay for the
services; provide that a person convicted of a
third offense would be authorized or required to
obtain an ignition interlock device after the
completion of his or her incarceration; would
require manufacturers to provide ignition interlock
services to indigent under certain conditions
without charge; and would specify the number of
violations for extension of ignition interlock
requirements to be consistent with Department of
Forensic Sciences rules.
Amendment 621 of the Constitution of Alabama
of 1901, now appearing as Section 111.05 of the
Official Recompilation of the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, as amended, prohibits a general
law whose purpose or effect would be to require a
new or increased expenditure of local funds from
becoming effective with regard to a local
governmental entity without enactment by a 2/3 vote
unless: it comes within one of a number of
specified exceptions; it is approved by the
affected entity; or the Legislature appropriates
funds, or provides a local source of revenue, to
the entity for the purpose.
The purpose or effect of this bill would be
to require a new or increased expenditure of local
funds within the meaning of the amendment. However,
the bill does not require approval of a local
governmental entity or enactment by a 2/3 vote to
become effective because it comes within one of the
specified exceptions contained in the amendment.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
Relating to persons charged with driving under the
influence; to amend Section 32-5A-191, as amended by Act
2016-259, 2016 Regular Session, and Section 32-5A-191.4, Code
of Alabama 1975, to further require for the use of ignition
interlock devices including by persons approved for pretrial
diversion; and in connection therewith would have as its
purpose or effect the requirement of a new or increased
expenditure of local funds within the meaning of Amendment 621
of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, now appearing as
Section 111.05 of the Official Recompilation of the
Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as amended.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Section 32-5A-191, as amended by Act
2016-259, 2016 Regular Session, and Section 32-5A-191.4, Code
of Alabama 1975, are amended to read as follows:
"§32-5A-191.
"(a) A person shall not drive or be in actual
physical control of any vehicle while:
"(1) There is 0.08 percent or more by weight of
alcohol in his or her blood;
"(2) Under the influence of alcohol;
"(3) Under the influence of a controlled substance
to a degree which renders him or her incapable of safely
driving;
"(4) Under the combined influence of alcohol and a
controlled substance to a degree which renders him or her
incapable of safely driving; or
"(5) Under the influence of any substance which
impairs the mental or physical faculties of such person to a
degree which renders him or her incapable of safely driving.
"(b) A person who is under the age of 21 years shall
not drive or be in actual physical control of any vehicle if
there is 0.02 percent or more by weight of alcohol in his or
her blood. The Alabama State Law Enforcement Agency shall
suspend or revoke the driver's license of any person,
including, but not limited to, a juvenile, child, or youthful
offender, convicted or adjudicated of, or subjected to a
finding of, delinquency based on this subsection.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, upon the first violation of
this subsection by a person whose blood alcohol level is
between 0.02 and 0.08, the person's driver's license or
driving privilege shall be suspended for a period of 30 days
in lieu of any penalties provided in subsection (e) of this
section, and there shall be no disclosure, other than to
courts, law enforcement agencies, the person's attorney of
record, and the person's employer, by any entity or person of
any information, documents, or records relating to the
person's arrest, conviction, or adjudication of or finding of
delinquency based on this subsection.
"All persons, except as otherwise provided in this
subsection for a first offense, including, but not limited to,
a juvenile, child, or youthful offender, convicted or
adjudicated of or subjected to a finding of delinquency based
on this subsection shall be fined pursuant to this section,
notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, and the person
shall also be required to attend and complete a DUI or
substance abuse court referral program in accordance with
subsection (k).
"(c)(1) A school bus or day care driver shall not
drive or be in actual physical control of any vehicle while in
performance of his or her duties if there is greater than 0.02
percent by weight of alcohol in his or her blood. A person
convicted pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to the
penalties provided by this section, except that on the first
conviction the Secretary of the Alabama State Law Enforcement
Agency shall suspend the driving privilege or driver's license
for a period of one year.
"(2) A person shall not drive or be in actual
physical control of a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in
49 CFR Part 383.5 of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Regulations as adopted pursuant to Section 32-9A-2, if there
is 0.04 percent or greater by weight of alcohol in his or her
blood. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section,
the commercial driver's license or commercial driving
privilege of a person convicted of violating this subdivision
shall be disqualified for the period provided in accordance
with 49 CFR Part 383.51, as applicable, and the person's
regular driver's license or privilege to drive a regular motor
vehicle shall be governed by the remainder of this section if
the person is guilty of a violation of another provision of
this section.
"(3) Any commutation of suspension or revocation
time as it relates to a court order, approval, and
installation of an ignition interlock device shall not apply
to commercial driving privileges or disqualifications.
"(d) The fact that any person charged with violating
this section is or has been legally entitled to use alcohol or
a controlled substance shall not constitute a defense against
any charge of violating this section.
"(e) Upon first conviction, a person violating this
section shall be punished by imprisonment in the county or
municipal jail for not more than one year, or by fine of not
less than six hundred dollars ($600) nor more than two
thousand one hundred dollars ($2,100), or by both a fine and
imprisonment. In addition, on a first conviction, the
Secretary of the Alabama State Law Enforcement Agency shall
suspend the driving privilege or driver's license of the
person convicted for a period of 90 days. The 90-day
suspension shall be stayed if the offender elects to have an
approved ignition interlock device installed and operating on
the designated motor vehicle driven by the offender for six
months. The offender shall present proof of installation of
the approved ignition interlock device to the Alabama State
Law Enforcement Agency and obtain an ignition interlock
restricted driver license. The remainder of the suspension
shall be commuted upon the successful completion of the
elected use, mandated use, or both, of the ignition interlock
device. If, on a first conviction, any person refusing to
provide a blood alcohol concentration or if a child under the
age of 14 years was a passenger in the vehicle at the time of
the offense or if someone else besides the offender was
injured at the time of the offense, the Secretary of the
Alabama State Law Enforcement Agency shall suspend the driving
privilege or driver's license of the person convicted for a
period of 90 days and the person shall be required to have an
ignition interlock device installed and operating on the
designated motor vehicle driven by the offender for a period
of two years from the date of issuance of a driver's license
indicating that the person's driving privileges are subject to
the condition of the installation and use of a certified
ignition interlock device on a motor vehicle. After a minimum
of 45 days of the license revocation or suspension pursuant to
Section 32-5A-304 or this section, or both, is completed, upon
receipt of a court order from the convicting court, upon
issuance of an ignition interlock restricted driver license,
and upon proof of installation of an operational approved
ignition interlock device on the designated vehicle of the
person convicted, the mandated ignition interlock period of
two years provided in this subsection shall start and the
suspension period, revocation period, or both, as required
under this subsection shall be stayed. The remainder of the
driver license revocation period, suspension period, or both,
shall be commuted upon the successful completion of the period
of time in which the ignition interlock device is mandated to
be installed and operational.
"(f) On a second conviction within a five-year
period, a person convicted of violating this section shall be
punished by a fine of not less than one thousand one hundred
dollars ($1,100) nor more than five thousand one hundred
dollars ($5,100) and by imprisonment, which may include hard
labor in the county or municipal jail for not more than one
year. The sentence shall include a mandatory sentence, which
is not subject to suspension or probation, of imprisonment in
the county or municipal jail for not less than five days or
community service for not less than 30 days. In addition, the
Secretary of the Alabama State Law Enforcement Agency shall
revoke the driving privileges or driver's license of the
person convicted for a period of one year and the offender
shall be required to have an ignition interlock device
installed and operating on the designated motor vehicle driven
by the offender for a period of two years from the date of
issuance of a driver's license indicating that the person's
driving privileges are subject to the condition of the
installation and use of a certified ignition interlock device
on a motor vehicle. After a minimum of 45 days of the license
revocation or suspension pursuant to Section 32-5A-304, this
section, or both, is completed, upon receipt of a court order
from the convicting court, upon issuance of an ignition
interlock restricted driver license, and upon proof of
installation or an operational approved ignition interlock
device on the designated vehicle of the person convicted, the
mandated ignition interlock period of two years approved in
this subsection shall start and the suspension period,
revocation period, or both, as required under this subsection
shall be stayed. The remainder of the driver license
revocation period, suspension period, or both, shall be
commuted upon the successful completion of the period of time
in which the ignition interlock device is mandated to be
installed and operational.
"(g) On a third conviction, a person convicted of
violating this section shall be punished by a fine of not less
than two thousand one hundred dollars ($2,100) nor more than
ten thousand one hundred dollars ($10,100) and by
imprisonment, which may include hard labor, in the county or
municipal jail for not less than 60 days nor more than one
year, to include a minimum of 60 days which shall be served in
the county or municipal jail and cannot be probated or
suspended. In addition, the Secretary of the Alabama State Law
Enforcement Agency shall revoke the driving privilege or
driver's license of the person convicted for a period of three
years and the offender shall be required to have an ignition
interlock device installed and operating on the designated
motor vehicle driven by the offender for a period of three
years from the date of issuance of a driver's license
indicating that the person's driving privileges are subject to
the condition of the installation and use of a certified
ignition interlock device on a motor vehicle. After a minimum
of 180 60 days of the license revocation or suspension
pursuant to Section 32-5A-304, this section, or both, is
completed, upon receipt of a court order from the convicting
court, upon issuance of an ignition interlock restricted
driver license, and upon proof of installation of an
operational approved ignition interlock device on the
designated vehicle of the person convicted, the mandated
ignition interlock period of three years provided in this
subsection shall start and the suspension period, revocation
period, or both, as required under this subsection shall be
stayed. The remainder of the driver license revocation period,
suspension period, or both, shall be commuted upon the
successful completion of the period of time in which the
ignition interlock device is mandated to be installed and
operational.
"(h) On a fourth or subsequent conviction, a person
convicted of violating this section shall be guilty of a Class
C felony and punished by a fine of not less than four thousand
one hundred dollars ($4,100) nor more than ten thousand one
hundred dollars ($10,100) and by imprisonment of not less than
one year and one day nor more than 10 years. Any term of
imprisonment may include hard labor for the county or state,
and where imprisonment does not exceed three years confinement
may be in the county jail. Where imprisonment does not exceed
one year and one day, confinement shall be in the county jail.
The minimum sentence shall include a term of imprisonment for
at least one year and one day, provided, however, that there
shall be a minimum mandatory sentence of 10 days which shall
be served in the county jail. The remainder of the sentence
may be suspended or probated, but only if as a condition of
probation the defendant enrolls and successfully completes a
state certified chemical dependency program recommended by the
court referral officer and approved by the sentencing court.
Where probation is granted, the sentencing court may, in its
discretion, and where monitoring equipment is available, place
the defendant on house arrest under electronic surveillance
during the probationary term. In addition to the other
penalties authorized, the Secretary of the Alabama State Law
Enforcement Agency shall revoke the driving privilege or
driver's license of the person convicted for a period of five
years and the offender shall be required to have an ignition
interlock device installed and operating on the designated
motor vehicle driven by the offender for a period of five
years from the date of issuance of a driver's license
indicating that the person's driving privileges are subject to
the condition of the installation and use of a certified
ignition interlock device on a motor vehicle. After a minimum
of one year of the license revocation or suspension pursuant
to Section 32-5A-304, this section, or both, is completed,
upon receipt of a court order from the convicting court, upon
issuance of an ignition interlock restricted driver license,
and upon proof of installation of an operational approved
ignition interlock device on the designated vehicle of the
person convicted, the mandated ignition interlock period of
five years provided in this subsection shall start and the
suspension period, revocation period, or both, as required
under this subsection shall be stayed. The remainder of the
driver license revocation period, suspension period, or both,
shall be commuted upon the successful completion of the period
of time in which the ignition interlock device is mandated to
be installed and operational.
"The Alabama habitual felony offender law shall not
apply to a conviction of a felony pursuant to this subsection,
and a conviction of a felony pursuant to this subsection shall
not be a felony conviction for purposes of the enhancement of
punishment pursuant to Alabama's habitual felony offender law.
However, prior misdemeanor or felony convictions for driving
under the influence may be considered as part of the
sentencing calculations or determinations under the Alabama
Sentencing Guidelines or rules promulgated by the Alabama
Sentencing Commission.
"(i) When any person convicted of violating this
section is found to have had at least 0.15 percent or more by
weight of alcohol in his or her blood while operating or being
in actual physical control of a vehicle, he or she shall be
sentenced to at least double the minimum punishment that the
person would have received if he or she had had less than 0.15
percent by weight of alcohol in his or her blood. Upon the
first violation of this subsection, the offender shall be
ordered by the court to have an ignition interlock device
installed and operating on his or her designated motor vehicle
for a period of two years from the date of issuance of an
ignition interlock-restricted driver's license. If the
adjudicated offense is a misdemeanor, the minimum punishment
shall be imprisonment for one year, all of which may be
suspended except as otherwise provided for in subsections (f)
and (g).
"(j) When any person over the age of 21 years is
convicted of violating this section and it is found that a
child under the age of 14 years was a passenger in the vehicle
at the time of the offense, the person shall be sentenced to
at least double the minimum punishment that the person would
have received if the child had not been a passenger in the
motor vehicle.
"(k)(1) In addition to the penalties provided
herein, any person convicted of violating this section shall
be referred to the court referral officer for evaluation and
referral to appropriate community resources. The defendant
shall, at a minimum, be required to complete a DUI or
substance abuse court referral program approved by the
Administrative Office of Courts and operated in accordance
with provisions of the Mandatory Treatment Act of 1990,
Sections 12-23-1 to 12-23-19, inclusive. The Alabama State Law
Enforcement Agency shall not reissue a driver's license to a
person convicted under this section without receiving proof
that the defendant has successfully completed the required
program.
"(2) Upon conviction, the court shall notify the
Alabama State Law Enforcement Agency if the person convicted
is required to install and maintain an approved ignition
interlock device. The agency shall suspend or revoke a
person's driving privileges until completion of the mandatory
suspension or revocation period required by this section, and
clearance of all other suspensions, revocations,
cancellations, or denials, and proof of installation of an
approved ignition interlock device is presented to the agency.
The agency shall not reissue a driver's license to a person
who has been ordered by a court or is required by law to have
the ignition interlock device installed until proof is
presented that the person is eligible for reinstatement of
driving privileges. Upon presentation of proof and compliance
with all ignition interlock requirements, the agency shall
issue a driver's license with a restriction indicating that
the licensee may operate a motor vehicle only with the
certified ignition interlock device installed and properly
operating. If the licensee fails to maintain the approved
ignition interlock device as required or is otherwise not in
compliance with any order of the court, the court shall notify
the agency of the noncompliance and the agency shall suspend
the person's driving privileges until the agency receives
notification from the court that the licensee is in
compliance. The requirement that the licensee use the ignition
interlock device may be removed only when the court of
conviction confirms to the agency that the licensee is no
longer subject to the ignition interlock device requirement.
"(l) Neither reckless driving nor any other traffic
infraction is a lesser included offense under a charge of
driving under the influence of alcohol or of a controlled
substance.
"(m) Except for fines collected for violations of
this section charged pursuant to a municipal ordinance, fines
collected for violations of this section shall be deposited to
the State General Fund; however, beginning October 1, 1995, of
any amount collected over two hundred fifty dollars ($250) for
a first conviction, over five hundred dollars ($500) for a
second conviction within five years, over one thousand dollars
($1,000) for a third conviction within five years, and over
two thousand dollars ($2,000) for a fourth or subsequent
conviction within five years, the first one hundred dollars
($100) of that additional amount shall be deposited to the
Alabama Chemical Testing Training and Equipment Trust Fund,
after three percent of the one hundred dollars ($100) is
deducted for administrative costs, and beginning October 1,
1997, and thereafter, the second one hundred dollars ($100) of
that additional amount shall be deposited in the Alabama Head
and Spinal Cord Injury Trust Fund after deducting five percent
of the one hundred dollars ($100) for administrative costs and
the remainder of the funds shall be deposited to the State
General Fund. Fines collected for violations of this section
charged pursuant to a municipal ordinance where the total fine
is paid at one time shall be deposited as follows: The first
three hundred fifty dollars ($350) collected for a first
conviction, the first six hundred dollars ($600) collected for
a second conviction within five years, the first one thousand
one hundred dollars ($1,100) collected for a third conviction,
and the first two thousand one hundred dollars ($2,100)
collected for a fourth or subsequent conviction shall be
deposited to the State Treasury with the first one hundred
dollars ($100) collected for each conviction credited to the
Alabama Chemical Testing Training and Equipment Trust Fund and
the second one hundred dollars ($100) to the Alabama Head and
Spinal Cord Injury Trust Fund after deducting five percent of
the one hundred dollars ($100) for administrative costs and
depositing this amount in the general fund of the
municipality, and the balance credited to the State General
Fund. Any amounts collected over these amounts shall be
deposited as otherwise provided by law. Fines collected for
violations of this section charged pursuant to a municipal
ordinance, where the fine is paid on a partial or installment
basis, shall be deposited as follows: The first two hundred
dollars ($200) of the fine collected for any conviction shall
be deposited to the State Treasury with the first one hundred
dollars ($100) collected for any conviction credited to the
Alabama Chemical Testing Training and Equipment Trust Fund and
the second one hundred dollars ($100) for any conviction
credited to the Alabama Head and Spinal Cord Injury Trust Fund
after deducting five percent of the one hundred dollars ($100)
for administrative costs and depositing this amount in the
general fund of the municipality. The second three hundred
dollars ($300) of the fine collected for a first conviction,
the second eight hundred dollars ($800) collected for a second
conviction, the second one thousand eight hundred dollars
($1,800) collected for a third conviction, and the second
three thousand eight hundred dollars ($3,800) collected for a
fourth conviction shall be divided with 50 percent of the
funds collected to be deposited to the State Treasury to be
credited to the State General Fund and 50 percent deposited as
otherwise provided by law for municipal ordinance violations.
Any amounts collected over these amounts shall be deposited as
otherwise provided by law for municipal ordinance violations.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, 90
percent of any fine assessed and collected for any DUI offense
charged by municipal ordinance violation in district or
circuit court shall be computed only on the amount assessed
over the minimum fine authorized, and upon collection shall be
distributed to the municipal general fund with the remaining
10 percent distributed to the State General Fund. In addition
to fines imposed pursuant to this subsection, a mandatory fee
of one hundred dollars ($100) shall be collected from any
individual that successfully completes any pretrial diversion
or deferral program in any municipal, district, or circuit
court where the individual was charged with a violation of
this section or a corresponding municipal ordinance. The one
hundred dollars ($100) shall be deposited into the Alabama
Chemical Testing Training and Equipment Fund.
"(n) A person who has been arrested for violating
this section shall not be released from jail under bond or
otherwise, until there is less than the same percent by weight
of alcohol in his or her blood as specified in subsection
(a)(1) or, in the case of a person who is under the age of 21
years, subsection (b) hereof.
"(o) Upon verification that a defendant arrested
pursuant to this section is currently on probation from
another court of this state as a result of a conviction for
any criminal offense, the prosecutor shall provide written or
oral notification of the defendant's subsequent arrest and
pending prosecution to the court in which the prior conviction
occurred.
"(p) A prior conviction within a five-year period
for driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs from this
state, a municipality within this state, or another state or
territory or a municipality of another state or territory
shall be considered by a court for imposing a sentence
pursuant to this section.
"(q) Any person convicted of driving under the
influence of alcohol, or a controlled substance, or both, or
any substance which impairs the mental or physical faculties
in violation of this section, a municipal ordinance adopting
this section, or a similar law from another state or territory
or a municipality of another state or territory more than once
in a five-year period shall have his or her motor vehicle
registration for all vehicles owned by the repeat offender
suspended by the Alabama Department of Revenue for the
duration of the offender's driver's license suspension period,
unless such action would impose an undue hardship to any
individual, not including the repeat offender, who is
completely dependent on the motor vehicle for the necessities
of life, including any family member of the repeat offender
and any co-owner of the vehicle or, in the case of a repeat
offender, if the repeat offender has a functioning ignition
interlock device installed on the designated vehicle for the
duration of the offender's driver's license suspension period.
"(r)(1) Any person ordered by the court to have an
ignition interlock device installed on a designated vehicle,
and any person who elects to have the ignition interlock
device installed on a designated vehicle for the purpose of
reducing a period of suspension or revocation of his or her
driver's license, shall pay to the court, for each of the
first four months following his or her conviction or the first
four months following the installation of the ignition
interlock device on his or her vehicle, seventy-five dollars
($75) per month two hundred dollars ($200), which may be paid
in installments and which shall be divided as follows:
"a. Forty-five Seventeen percent to the Alabama
Interlock Indigent Fund.
"b. Twenty For cases in the district or circuit
court, 30 percent to the State Judicial Administration Fund
administered by the Administrative Office of Courts and for
cases in the municipal court, 30 percent to the municipal
judicial administration fund of the municipality where the
municipal court is located to be used for the operation of the
municipal court.
"c. Twenty Thirty percent to the Highway Traffic
Safety Fund administered by the Alabama State Law Enforcement
Agency.
"d. Fifteen Twenty-three percent to the District
Attorney's Solicitor Fund.
"(2) In addition to paying the court clerk
seventy-five dollars ($75) per month for the first four months
the fee required above following the conviction or the
voluntary installation of the ignition interlock device, the
defendant shall pay all costs associated with the
installation, purchase, maintenance, or lease of the ignition
interlock devices to an approved ignition interlock provider
pursuant to the rules of the Department of Forensic Sciences,
unless the defendant is subject to Section 32-5A-191.4(g)(4)
during which he or she shall pay one-half the cost for the
available indigency period 32-5A-191.4(i)(4).
"(s) The defendant shall designate the vehicle to be
used by identifying the vehicle by the vehicle identification
number to the court. The defendant, at his or her own expense,
may designate additional motor vehicles on which an ignition
interlock device may be installed for the use of the
defendant.
"(t)(1) Any person who is required to comply with
the ignition interlock provisions of this section as a
condition of restoration or reinstatement of his or her
driver's license, shall only operate the designated vehicle
equipped with a functioning ignition interlock device for the
period of time consistent with the offense for which he or she
was convicted as provided for in this section.
"(2) The duration of the time an ignition interlock
device is required by this section shall be doubled if the
offender refused the prescribed chemical test for
intoxication, or if the offender's blood alcohol concentration
was 0.15 grams percent or greater unless already doubled by a
previous section.
"(u)(1) The Alabama State Law Enforcement Agency may
set a fee of not more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150)
for the issuance of a driver's license indicating that the
person's driving privileges are subject to the condition of
the installation and use of a certified ignition interlock
device on a motor vehicle. Fifteen percent of the fee shall be
distributed to the general fund of the county where the person
was convicted to be utilized for law enforcement purposes.
Eighty-five percent shall be distributed to the State General
Fund. In addition, at the end of the time the person's driving
privileges are subject to the above conditions, the agency
shall set a fee of not more than seventy-five dollars ($75) to
reissue a regular driver's license. The fee shall be deposited
as provided in Sections 32-6-5, 32-6-6, and 32-6-6.1.
"(2) The defendant shall provide proof of
installation of an approved ignition interlock device to the
Alabama State Law Enforcement Agency as a condition of the
issuance of a restricted driver's license.
"(3) Any ignition interlock driving violation
committed by the offender during the mandated ignition
interlock period shall extend the duration of ignition
interlock use for six months from the date of violation.
Ignition interlock driving violations include any of the
following:
"a. A breath sample at or above a minimum blood
alcohol concentration level of 0.02 recorded more than four or
more times during the monthly reporting period.
"b. Any tampering, circumvention, or bypassing of
the ignition interlock device, or attempt thereof.
"c. Failure to comply with the servicing or
calibration requirements of the ignition interlock device
every 30 days.
"(v) Nothing in this section and Section 32-5A-191.4
shall require an employer to install an ignition interlock
device in a vehicle owned or operated by the employer for use
by an employee required to use the device as a condition of
driving pursuant to this section and Section 32-5A-191.4.
"(w) The provisions in this section and Section
32-5A-191.4 relating to ignition interlock devices shall not
apply to persons who commit violations of this section while
under 19 years of age and who are adjudicated in juvenile
court, unless specifically ordered otherwise by the court.
"(x)(1) The amendatory language in Act 2014-222 to
this section, authorizing the Alabama State Law Enforcement
Agency to stay a driver's license suspension or revocation
upon compliance with the ignition interlock requirement shall
apply retroactively if any of the following occurs:
"a. The offender files an appeal with the court of
jurisdiction requesting all prior suspensions or revocation,
or both, be stayed upon compliance with the ignition interlock
requirement.
"b. The offender wins appeal with the court of
jurisdiction relating to this section.
"c. The court of jurisdiction notifies the Alabama
State Law Enforcement Agency that the offender is eligible to
have the driver's license stayed.
"d. The Alabama State Law Enforcement Agency issues
an ignition interlock restricted driver's license.
"e. The offender remains in compliance of ignition
interlock requirements.
"(2) The remainder of the driver license revocation,
suspension, or both, shall be commuted upon the successful
completion of the period of time in which the ignition
interlock device is mandated to be installed and operational.
"(y) Any person charged in a district, circuit, or
municipal court with a violation of this section or a
municipal ordinance adopted in conformance with this section
who is approved for any pretrial diversion program or similar
program shall be required to install an ignition interlock
device for a minimum of six months or the duration of the
pretrial diversion program, whichever is greater, and meet all
the requirements of this section and Section 32-5A-191.4 that
a person convicted of a violation of this section or a
municipal ordinance is required to meet. A participant in a
pretrial diversion program shall be eligible for indigency
status if the program enrolls indigent defendants and waives
fees for indigent defendants.
"§32-5A-191.4.
"(a) As used in Section 32-5A-191, the term,
"ignition interlock device" means a constant monitoring device
that prevents a motor vehicle from being started at any time
without first determining the equivalent blood alcohol level
of the operator through the taking of a breath sample for
testing. The system shall be calibrated so that the motor
vehicle may not be started if the blood alcohol level of the
operator, as measured by the test, reaches a blood alcohol
concentration level of 0.02.
"(b) The ignition interlock device shall be
installed, calibrated, and monitored directly by trained
technicians who shall train the offender for whom the device
is being installed in the proper use of the device. The use of
a mail in or remote calibration system where the technician is
not in the immediate proximity of the vehicle being calibrated
is prohibited. The Department of Forensic Sciences shall
promulgate rules for punishment and appeal for ignition
interlock providers relating to violation of this subsection.
"(c) The Department of Forensic Sciences shall
formulate and promulgate rules for the proper approval,
installation, and use of ignition interlock devices.
Additionally, the Department of Forensic Sciences shall
maintain and make public the list of approved ignition
interlock devices.
"(d) The Department of Forensic Sciences may adopt
in whole or relevant part the guidelines, rules, regulations,
studies, or independent laboratory tests performed or relied
upon by other states, their agencies, or commissions.
"(e) The Department of Forensic Sciences shall
promulgate rules regulating approved ignition interlock
providers related to areas of consumer coverage. The rules
shall address areas of consumer coverage and shall provide for
a two-year period from July 1, 2014, to allow provider
compliance.
"(f) The Department of Forensic Sciences shall
charge an application fee of two thousand dollars ($2,000) to
any ignition interlock provider to evaluate the instrument.
Any ignition interlock provider whose ignition interlock
device is approved by the Department of Forensic Sciences
shall be permitted to install and calibrate its approved
device in Alabama. Each year during the month of April, the
Department of Forensic Sciences may receive applications and
instruments to review for approval.
"(g) The Department of Public Safety shall be
responsible for enforcing the rules promulgated by the
Department of Forensic Sciences related to ignition interlock
devices and providers. The Department of Public Safety shall
promulgate rules regulating the inspection and enforcement of
approved ignition interlock providers and any associate
service locations.
"(h) In the absence of negligence, wantonness, or
willful misconduct, no person or employer or agent of a person
who installs an ignition interlock device pursuant to Section
32-5A-191 shall be liable for any occurrence related to the
device, including, but not limited to, occurrences resulting
from or related to a malfunction of the device or use of,
misuse of, or failure to use the device or the vehicle in
which the device was installed.
"(i)(1) When the court imposes the use of an
ignition interlock device as required by Section 32-5A-191,
the court shall require that the person provide proof of
installation of a device to the court or a probation officer
within 30 days of the date the defendant becomes eligible to
receive an ignition interlock-restricted license from the
Department of Public Safety. If the person fails to provide
proof of installation within that period, absent a finding by
the court of good cause for that failure which is entered into
the court record, the court may revoke the person's probation
where applicable after a petition to revoke probation has been
filed and the defendant has been given notice and an
opportunity to be heard on the petition. The court in which
the defendant is convicted shall notify the department that
the defendant is restricted to the operation of a motor
vehicle only when an approved ignition interlock device is
installed and properly operating. Nothing in this subsection
shall permit a person who does not own a vehicle or otherwise
have an ignition interlock device installed on a motor vehicle
to operate a motor vehicle without an approved ignition
interlock device installed and properly operating.
"(2) Proof of installation for the purpose of this
subsection may be furnished by either a certificate of
installation or a copy of the lease agreement in the name of
the offender for the designated vehicle with an approved
ignition interlock device company.
"(3) A defendant who is determined by the court to
be indigent for the purpose of ignition interlock may have an
ignition interlock device installed by an ignition interlock
provider as provided in this subsection. Criteria for
determining indigency for the purpose of ignition interlock
shall be the same criteria as set forth in Section 15-12-5(b)
and (c) after the report is complete. In determining whether
the defendant is indigent for the purpose of ignition
interlock, the judge shall require an investigation and report
by a sheriff, adult probation officer, or other officer of the
court. The report may include input from the district attorney
or municipal prosecutor. The defendant shall execute an
affidavit of substantial hardship on a form approved by the
Supreme Court. The completed affidavit of substantial hardship
and the subsequent order of the court either denying or
granting indigency status for the purpose of ignition
interlock to the offender shall become a part of the official
court record in the case and shall be submitted by the
offender to the interlock provider.
"(4) Any offender granted indigency status for the
purpose of ignition interlock shall pay one-half of not be
required to pay the costs associated with installing and
maintaining an interlock device for a the period of no more
than two years at which time the offender shall pay the full
remaining cost for any sentence left for ignition interlock.
The defendant shall pay any fees for any violation of ignition
interlock requirements and for any optional services elected
by the defendant and for any missing or damaged equipment.
This section shall not affect any fees associated with the
driver's license of the defendant.
"(5)a. All interlock providers shall be required to
pay one and one-half percent of all payments collected less
any payments made by a defendant determined as indigent for
the purpose of ignition interlock to the Alabama Ignition
Interlock Indigent Fund in the State Treasury. ALEA shall
require each approved manufacturer to provide a minimum number
of indigent defendants with ignition interlock services,
including installation, lease, calibration, and removal at no
cost to the indigent defendant. The minimum number of indigent
defendants provided services shall be equal to five percent of
the total installations provided by the manufacturer during
the prior calendar year.
"b. ALEA shall oversee the administration of
indigent services on an annual basis by doing all of the
following:
"1. Verifying the total number of installations
provided by the manufacturer each year.
"2. Verifying the number of installations for
indigent defendants provided each year by each manufacturer.
"3. Conducting random audits of payments based on
the list of indigent defendants serviced by each manufacturer.
"c. Each manufacturer who fails to meet the five
percent threshold for indigent defendants shall be subject to
a civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500) for each
indigent defendant the manufacturer failed to provided
services below the five percent threshold. All fines shall be
collected by ALEA and deposited in the Alabama Ignition
Interlock Indigent Fund.
"b.d. The Alabama Ignition Interlock Indigent Fund
is created in the State Treasury. The fund shall be
administered by the Department of Public Safety ALEA. All
Except as provided in paragraph e., all of the money in the
fund shall be used to reimburse ignition interlock device
providers who have installed devices in vehicles of indigent
persons pursuant to court orders issued under this section. No
provider shall be reimbursed for an interlock device installed
without the completed affidavit of substantial hardship and
the subsequent order of the court granting indigency status.
Payments to interlock device providers pursuant to this
subdivision shall be made every three months. If the amount of
money in the fund at the time payments are made is not
sufficient to pay all requests for reimbursement submitted
during that three-month period, the Comptroller shall make
payments on a pro rata basis and those payments shall be
considered payment in full for the requests submitted. At the
end of each fiscal year, all monies above five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000) remaining in the Alabama Ignition
Interlock Indigent Fund shall be divided as follows:
"1. Thirty percent to the Highway Traffic Safety
Fund administered by the Department of Public Safety.
"2. Twenty percent to the Alabama Chemical Testing
Training and Equipment Trust Fund administered by the
Department of Forensic Sciences.
"3. Thirty percent to the District Attorney's
Solicitor’s Fund.
"4. Twenty percent to the Office of Prosecution
Services.
"e. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph d.,
10 percent of the first five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000) collected in the fund each year may be used by ALEA
for any of the following additional purposes on an annual
basis:
"1. Annual reporting and assessment of manufacturer
compliance with indigent service requirements.
"2. Notice and collection of any fines for
noncompliance.
"3. Annual inspection of interlock service centers
by ALEA.
"(6) Any defendant who does not own a vehicle or
otherwise have an ignition interlock device installed on a
vehicle shall be required to pay seventy-five dollars ($75)
per month for the entire period the defendant is required or
elects to have an ignition interlock device. The defendant
shall still serve all license suspension or revocation, or
both, during this period. Any monies paid pursuant to this
subdivision shall be paid to the court clerk and shall be
deposited in the Alabama Impaired Driving Prevention and
Enforcement Fund in the State Treasury to be used by the
Department of Public Safety for impaired driving education and
enforcement.
"(j) No person who is prohibited from operating a
motor vehicle unless it is equipped with an ignition interlock
device as provided in Section 32-5A-191 shall knowingly:
"(1) Operate, lease, or borrow a motor vehicle
unless that vehicle is equipped with a functioning ignition
interlock device.
"(2) Request or solicit any other person to blow
into an ignition interlock device or to start a motor vehicle
equipped with the device for the purpose of providing the
person so restricted with an operable motor vehicle.
"(k)(1) Any person who operates a motor vehicle in
violation of subsection (j) shall be immediately removed from
the vehicle and taken into custody. The vehicle, regardless of
ownership or possessory interest of the operator or person
present in the vehicle, except when the owner of the vehicle
or another family member of the owner is present in the
vehicle and presents a valid driver's license, shall be
impounded by any duly sworn law enforcement officer pursuant
to Section 32-6-19(c). If there is an emergency or medical
necessity jeopardizing life or limb, the law enforcement
officer may elect not to impound the vehicle.
"(2) A violation of subsection (j) on the first
offense is a Class A misdemeanor and punishable as provided by
law. In addition, the time the defendant is required to use an
ignition interlock device shall be extended by six months.
Upon second conviction of a violation of subsection (j), the
sentence shall include a mandatory sentence, which is not
subject to suspension or probation, of imprisonment in the
county or municipal jail for not less than 48 hours and the
time the defendant is required to use an ignition interlock
device shall be extended by six months. Upon a third or
subsequent conviction of a violation of subsection (j), the
sentence shall include a mandatory sentence, which is not
subject to suspension or probation, of imprisonment in the
county or municipal jail for not less than five days and the
time the defendant shall be required to use an ignition
interlock device shall be extended by one year.
"(l) No person shall blow into an ignition interlock
device or start a motor vehicle equipped with the device for
the purpose of providing an operable motor vehicle to a person
who is prohibited from operating a motor vehicle without an
ignition interlock device.
"(m) No person shall intentionally attempt to tamper
with, defeat, or circumvent the operation of an ignition
interlock device.
"(n) Any person convicted of a violation of this
section other than subsection (j) shall be punished by
imprisonment for not more than six months or a fine of not
more than five hundred dollars ($500), or both."
Section 2. Although this bill would have as its
purpose or effect the requirement of a new or increased
expenditure of local funds, the bill is excluded from further
requirements and application under Amendment 621, now
appearing as Section 111.05 of the Official Recompilation of
the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as amended, because the
bill defines a new crime or amends the definition of an
existing crime.
Section 3. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.