SB53
181362-1
By Senators Pittman, Orr, Shelnutt, Chambliss, Brewbaker,
Albritton, Allen, Glover, Marsh, Reed, Stutts, Waggoner,
Hightower and Bussman (Constitutional Amendment)
RFD: Constitution, Ethics and Elections
First Read: 07-FEB-17
PFD: 02/02/2017
181362-1:n:01/17/2017:JMH/cj LRS2017-216
SYNOPSIS:           This bill would propose an amendment to the
Constitution of Alabama of 1901, that would provide
that no person may be elected to either house of
the Legislature for more than three full
consecutive terms. The amendment would provide that
an election to either the Senate or the House of
Representatives for at least two years would be
equivalent to the election for a full term in that
respective body. The amendment would provide that
service in the Senate and service in the House of
Representatives prior to November 2017 would not
disqualify, in whole or in part, a person from
service in that respective body following that
date.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
To propose an amendment to the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, to provide that (1) no person may be elected
to the Senate for more than three consecutive terms of office
in the Senate and no person may be elected to the House of
Representatives for more than three consecutive full terms in
the House of Representatives, (2) an election to the Senate
and an election to the House of Representatives for at least
two years would be equivalent to the election of a person for
a full term in the respective body, and (3) service in the
Senate and service in the House of Representatives prior to
November 2017 would not disqualify, in whole or in part, a
person from service in the respective body following such
date.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. The following amendment to the
Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as amended, is proposed and
shall become valid as a part thereof when approved by a
majority of the qualified electors voting thereon and in
accordance with Sections 284, 285, and 287 of the Constitution
of Alabama of 1901, as amended:
PROPOSED AMENDMENT
No person may be elected to the Alabama Senate for
more than three full consecutive terms. No person may be
elected to the Alabama House of Representatives for more than
three full consecutive terms. An election to either the Senate
or the House of Representatives for at least two years shall
be equivalent to the election of a person for a full term in
the respective body. Notwithstanding the foregoing, service in
the Senate prior to November 2017 shall not disqualify, in
whole or in part, a person from service in the Senate
following that date, and service in the House of
Representatives prior to November 2017 shall not disqualify,
in whole or in part, a person from service in the House of
Representatives following that date.
Section 2. An election upon the proposed amendment
shall be held in accordance with the provisions of Sections
284 and 285 of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, now
appearing as Sections 284 and 285 of the Official
Recompilation of the Constitution of Alabama, 1901, as
amended, and in accordance with the election laws of this
state.
Section 3. The appropriate election official shall
assign a ballot number for the proposed constitutional
amendment on the election ballot and shall set forth the
following description of the substance or subject matter of
the proposed constitutional amendment:
"Proposing an amendment to the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, to provide that no person may be elected to
the Senate of Alabama for more than three consecutive terms
and no person may be elected to the Alabama House of
Representatives for more than three consecutive terms.
"Proposed by Act ________."
This description shall be followed by the following
language:
"Yes ( )   No ( )."