HB420
183080-8
By Representative Martin
RFD: Financial Services
First Read: 16-MAR-17
ENROLLED, An Act,
To specifically authorize and regulate guaranteed
asset protection waivers related to motor vehicle loans; to
define terms; to provide for enforcement and civil penalties
by the Superintendent of Banks; and for this purpose to add
Chapter 37 to Title 8, Code of Alabama 1975.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Chapter 37 is added to Title 8, Code of
Alabama 1975, to read as follows:
CHAPTER 37.
§8-37-1.
(a) The purpose of this act is to define guaranteed
asset protection waivers (GAP waivers) and to provide that GAP
waivers may be offered within this state.
(b) This act does not apply to either of the
following:
(1) An insurance policy offered by an insurer under
the insurance laws of this state.
(2) A debt cancellation or debt suspension contract
being offered by a federally regulated financial institution
operating under 12 CFR Part 37 or a credit union operating
under 12 CFR Part 721 or other federal law; or a debt
cancellation or debt suspension contract being offered by a
state chartered bank or credit union. Debt cancellation and
debt suspension contracts being offered by any of these
federal or state regulated financial institutions are not
insurance and are exempt from the insurance laws of this
state.
(c) Guaranteed asset protection waivers governed
under this act are not insurance and are exempt from the
insurance laws of this state. Persons marketing, selling, or
offering to sell guaranteed asset protection waivers to
borrowers that comply with this act are exempt from insurance
licensing and insurance regulation requirements of this state.
(d) This act applies only to GAP waivers for
financing of motor vehicles as defined in this act. This act
does not affect the validity or enforcement of other asset
protection waivers, debt cancellation contracts, or debt
suspension agreements.
§8-37-2.
For the purposes of this act, the following words
have the following meanings:
(1) ADMINISTRATOR. A person, other than an insurer
or creditor, that performs administrative or operational
functions pursuant to guaranteed asset protection waiver
programs.
(2) BORROWER. A debtor, retail buyer or lessee,
under a finance agreement.
(3) CREDITOR means any of the following:
a. The lender in a loan or credit transaction.
b. The lessor in a lease transaction.
c. Any retail seller of motor vehicles provided that
the entities comply with the provisions of this act. in a
retail installment transaction.
d. The seller in commercial retail installment
transactions.
e. The assignees of any of the foregoing to whom the
credit or lease obligation is payable.
(4) FINANCE AGREEMENT. A loan, lease, or retail
installment sales contract for the purchase or lease of a
motor vehicle.
(5) FREE LOOK PERIOD. The period of time from the
effective date of the GAP waiver until the date the borrower
may cancel the GAP waiver without penalty, fees, or costs to
the borrower. This period of time shall not be shorter than 30
days.
(6) GUARANTEED ASSET PROTECTION WAIVER or GAP
WAIVER. A contractual agreement in which a creditor agrees for
a separate charge to cancel or waive all or part of amounts
due on a borrower's finance agreement in the event of a total
physical damage loss or unrecovered theft of the motor
vehicle, which agreement shall be part of, or a separate
addendum to, the finance agreement.
(7) INSURER. An insurance company licensed,
registered, or otherwise authorized to do business under the
insurance laws of this state.
(8) MOTOR VEHICLE. Self-propelled or towed vehicles
designed for personal or commercial use, including but not
limited to automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, recreational
vehicles, all terrain vehicles, snowmobiles, campers, boats,
personal watercraft, and motorcycle, and boat, camper and
personal watercraft trailers.
(9) PERSON. An individual, company, association,
organization, partnership, business trust, corporation, and
every form of legal entity.
§8-37-3.
(a) GAP waivers maybe may be offered, sold, or
provided to borrowers in this state in compliance with under
this act.
(b) GAP waivers, at the option of the creditor that
offers the GAP waiver, may be sold for a single payment or may
be offered with a monthly or periodic payment option.
(c) Notwithstanding any other provision of law and
subject to Section 8-37-7, any cost to the borrower for a GAP
waiver entered into in compliance with The Truth in Lending
Act, 15 USC 1601 et. seq., and its implementing regulations,
as they may be amended from time to time, shall be separately
stated and is not to be considered a finance charge or
interest. If the charge for a GAP waiver is financed, the
charge shall be separately itemized on the finance agreement.
(d) A retail seller shall insure its GAP waiver
obligations under a contractual liability or other insurance
policy issued by an insurer. A creditor, other than a retail
seller, may insure its GAP waiver obligations under a
contractual liability policy or similar policy issued by an
insurer. Any insurance policy may be directly obtained by a
creditor, retail seller, or may be procured by an
administrator to cover a creditor's or retail seller's
obligations under the GAP waiver. However retail sellers who
do not assign their finance agreements or retail sellers that
are lessors of motor vehicles are not required to insure
obligations related to GAP waivers on the sold or leased
vehicles.
(e) A GAP waiver remains a part of the finance
agreement upon the assignment, sale, or transfer of the
finance agreement by the creditor. The creditor,
administrator, or other designated party shall maintain for
three years after the maturity date of the finance agreement a
copy of or electronic details of each GAP waiver sold
regardless of the method of payment and the creditor
administrator, or other designated party shall provide copies
of or electronic details of the contracts to the
Superintendent of Banks upon reasonable advance written
notice.
(f) Neither the extension of credit, any term of
credit, nor the term of the related motor vehicle sale or
lease may be conditioned upon the purchase of a GAP waiver.
(g) Any creditor that offers a GAP waiver shall
report the sale of, and forward funds received on all waivers
to the designated party, if any, as prescribed in any
applicable administrative services agreement, contractual
liability policy, other insurance policy, or other specified
program documents.
(h) Funds received or held by a creditor or
administrator and belonging to an insurer, creditor, or
administrator, pursuant to the terms of a written agreement
shall be held by the creditor or administrator in a fiduciary
capacity.
§8-37-4.
(a) A contractual liability or other insurance
policy insuring a GAP waiver shall state the obligation of the
insurer to reimburse or pay to the creditor any sums the
creditor is legally obligated to waive under the GAP waiver
issued by the creditor and purchased or held by the borrower.
(b) Coverage under a contractual liability or other
insurance policy insuring a GAP waiver shall also cover any
subsequent assignee upon the assignment, sale, or transfer of
the finance agreement.
(c) Coverage under a contractual liability or other
insurance policy insuring a GAP waiver shall remain in effect
unless cancelled or terminated in compliance with applicable
insurance laws of this state.
(d) The cancellation or termination of a contractual
liability or other insurance policy shall not reduce the
insurer's responsibility for GAP waivers issued by the
creditor prior to the date of cancellation or termination and
for which premium has been received by the insurer.
§8-37-5.
Subject to Section 8-37-7, a creditor that offers a
GAP waiver shall disclose, as applicable, in writing and in
clear, understandable language that is easy to read, all of
the following:
(1) The name and address of the initial creditor and
the borrower at the time of sale and the identity of any
administrator if different from the creditor.
(2) The purchase price and the terms of the GAP
waiver, including without limitation, the requirements for
protection, conditions, or exclusions associated with the GAP
waiver.
(3) That the borrower may cancel the GAP waiver
within a Free Look Period as specified in the waiver, and will
be entitled to a full refund of the purchase price, so long as
no benefits have been provided. If cancelled after the Free
Look Period and no benefits have been provided, the borrower
shall receive a pro rata refund less a cancellation fee no
greater than fifty dollars ($50) in accordance with the terms
of the waiver.
(4) The procedure the borrower is required to follow
in order to obtain GAP waiver benefits under the terms and
conditions of the waiver, including a telephone number and
address where the borrower may apply for waiver benefits.
(5) The procedures for cancelling the GAP waiver and
requesting any refund due pursuant to Section 8-37-6.
(6) That neither the extension of credit, the terms
of the credit, nor the terms of the related motor vehicle sale
or lease, may be conditioned upon the purchase of the GAP
waiver.
(7) That the cost of the GAP waiver is not regulated
and that the borrower should determine whether the cost of the
GAP waiver is reasonable in relation to the protection
afforded by the GAP waiver.
§8-37-6.
(a) Guaranteed asset protection waiver agreements
shall be cancellable. GAP waivers shall provide that if a
borrower cancels a waiver within the Free Look Period, the
creditor, administrator, or other authorized party shall
provide the borrower a full refund of the purchase price of
the GAP waiver, provided no benefits have been provided. In
the event a borrower cancels the waiver after the Free Look
Period and no benefits have been provided, the creditor,
administrator, or other authorized party shall provide the
borrower a pro rata refund of the purchase price, less any
cancellation fee no greater than fifty dollars ($50) in
accordance with the terms of the waiver.
(b) In the event of cancellation of the GAP waiver
due to early termination of the finance agreement, the
creditor shall provide, or cause the administrator or retail
seller to provide, within 60 days of termination, any refund
due to a borrower without requiring the borrower to request
cancellation of the waiver.
(c) Any cancellation refund under subsection (a) or
(b) may be applied by the creditor as a reduction of the
amount owed under the finance agreement unless the borrower
can show that the finance agreement has been paid in full.
§8-37-7.
Subsection (c) of Section 8-37-3 and Sections 8-37-5
and 8-37-8 of this act are not applicable to a GAP waiver
offered in connection with a lease or retail installment sale
associated with a commercial transaction.
§8-37-8.
(a) The Superintendent of Banks may take action
which is necessary or appropriate to enforce the provisions of
this act and to protect GAP waiver holders in this state.
After proper notice and opportunity for hearing, the
superintendent may do both of the following:
(1) Order the creditor, administrator, or any other
person not in compliance with this section act to cease and
desist from further GAP waiver-related operations which are in
violation of this act.
(2) Impose a penalty of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500) per violation and no more than ten thousand
dollars ($10,000) in the aggregate for all violations of
similar nature. For purposes of this act, a violation shall be
considered to be of a similar nature if the violation consists
of the same or similar course of conduct, action, or practice,
irrespective of the number of times the action, conduct, or
practice which is determined to be a violation of the act
occurred.
(b) If requested by a retail seller, the
Superintendent of Banks may determine that the insurance
policy required by subsection (d) of Section 8-37-3 is not
required for a retail seller that does not assign any of its
finance agreements to any entity other than an affiliate and
if the affiliated assignee agrees that the insurance policy is
waived and the finance agreements will not be further
assigned. The superintendent may require the evidence and
assurances that the superintendent determines is needed to
make that determination.
§8-37-9.
The Legislature finds that guaranteed asset
protection waivers are not insurance. All guaranteed asset
protection waivers issued prior to and after the effective
date of this act shall not be construed as insurance.
Section 2. Creditors and other persons are not
required to comply with this act for any GAP waiver entered
into prior to the effective date of this act.
Section 3. This act shall be effective on January 1,
2018.
Speaker of the House of Representatives
President and Presiding Officer of the Senate
House of Representatives
I hereby certify that the within Act originated in
and was passed by the House 25-APR-17, as amended.
Jeff Woodard
Clerk
Senate                17-MAY-17                        Passed