SB361
183688-2
By Senators Orr and Whatley
RFD: Judiciary
First Read: 06-APR-17
183688-2:n:04/06/2017:JMH/mfc LRS2017-839R1
SYNOPSIS:           Under existing law, the Alabama Partnership
Act governs the formation, powers, governance, and
dissolution of partnerships in the state.
This bill would revise the Alabama
Partnership Act and would specify that the
procedures for formation, powers, governance, and
dissolution are applicable to limited liability
limited partnerships, limited liability
partnerships, foreign limited liability
partnerships, and foreign limited liability
partnerships that function in the state. This bill
would make conforming changes elsewhere in the
business entities law.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
Relating to business entities; to amend Section
10A-1-1.02, Section 10A-1-1.03, as amended by Act 2016-379,
2016 Regular Session, Sections 10A-1-1.06, 10A-1-1.08,
10A-1-1.12, 10A-1-2.02, 10A-1-3.06, 10A-1-3.17, 10A-1-3.32,
10A-1-3.33, 10A-1-3.41, 10A-1-4.01, 10A-1-4.02, 10A-1-4.25,
10A-1-4.31, 10A-1-5.01, 10A-1-5.02, 10A-1-5.03, 10A-1-5.04,
10A-1-5.05, 10A-1-5.06, and 10A-1-5.08; to add Section
10A-1-5.10; to amend Sections 10A-1-5.11, 10A-1-5.12,
10A-1-5.31, 10A-1-5.32, 10A-1-5.33, 10A-1-7.01, 10A-1-7.02,
10A-1-7.03, 10A-1-7.04, 10A-1-7.05, and 10A-1-7.06, Section
10A-1-7.07, as amended by Act 2016-379, 2016 Regular Session,
10A-1-7.11, 10A-1-7.12, 10A-1-7.13, 10A-1-7.14, 10A-1-7.22,
10A-1-7.23, 10A-1-7.24, 10A-1-7.31, 10A-1-7.32, 10A-1-7.34,
10A-1-7.36, 10A-1-7.37, 10A-1-8.01, 10A-1-8.02, and
10A-1-8.03, to amend and renumber Section 10A-1-9.01 as
10A-1-9.02, to add a new Section 10A-1-9.01, and to amend
Sections 10A-1-9.21, 10A-1-9.22, 10A-5A-1.02, 10A-5A-1.06,
10A-9A-1.07, and 10A-17-1.02 of the Code of Alabama 1975, to
revise and replace the Alabama Partnership Act; and to provide
that the procedures for formation, powers, governance, and
dissolution are applicable to limited liability limited
partnerships, limited liability partnerships, foreign limited
liability partnerships, and foreign limited liability limited
partnerships that function in the state; to repeal Sections
10A-1-5.07, 10A-1-7.33, and Chapter 8 of Title 10A, comprised
of Sections 10A-8-1.01 to 10A-8-11.04, inclusive, Code of
Alabama 1975; and to add Chapter 8A to Title 10A of the Code
of Alabama 1975.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Section 10A-1-1.02, Section 10A-1-1.03,
as amended by Act 2016-379, 2016 Regular Session, Sections
10A-1-1.06, 10A-1-1.08, 10A-1-1.12, 10A-1-2.02, 10A-1-3.06,
10A-1-3.17, 10A-1-3.32, 10A-1-3.33, 10A-1-3.41, 10A-1-4.01,
10A-1-4.02, 10A-1-4.25, 10A-1-4.31, 10A-1-5.01, 10A-1-5.02,
10A-1-5.03, 10A-1-5.04, 10A-1-5.05, 10A-1-5.06, and 10A-1-5.08
of the Code of Alabama 1975, are amended to read as follows:
"§10A-1-1.02.
"(a) All provisions of this chapter shall apply to
all entities formed under or governed by Chapters 2 to 11,
inclusive, except to the extent, if any, that any provision of
this chapter is inconsistent with or as otherwise provided by
the provisions of this title or other statutory or
constitutional provisions specifically applicable to the
entity.
"(b) The provisions of this chapter shall apply to
entities formed under or governed by Chapter 16, Chapter 17,
Chapter 20, and Chapter 30 only as provided therein or
expressly provided in this chapter.
"(c) If a provision of this chapter conflicts with a
provision in another chapter of this title, the provision of
the other chapter, to the extent of the conflict, supersedes
the provision of this chapter.
"(d) Any section of any act enacted at the 2009 and
2010 Regular Sessions in substantive conflict with any
provision of Act 2009-513 shall prevail over Act 2009-513
whether enacted before or after Act 2009-513.
"(e) When codifying Act 2009-513 and acts of the
2009 and 2010 Regular Sessions or any special session
occurring before the 2011 Regular Session, the Code
Commissioner shall place the provisions of other acts relating
to the subject of Act 2009-513 within the structure of Title
10A as specified by Act 2009-513. Actions taken by the Code
Commissioner in complying with this requirement shall include,
but not be limited to, placing a section that is amended and
renumbered by Act 2009-513 into the code in the substantive
form as amended by the other act but assigning it the code
section number contained in Act 2009-513 and assigning a
section number based on the numbering system contained in Act
2009-513 for any section amended by another act that is
repealed by Act 2009-513.
"§10A-1-1.03.
"As used in this title, unless the context otherwise
requires, the following terms mean:
"(1) AFFILIATE. A person who controls, is controlled
by, or is under common control with another person. An
affiliate of an individual includes the spouse, or a parent or
sibling thereof, of the individual, or a child, grandchild,
sibling, parent, or spouse of any thereof, of the individual,
or an individual having the same home as the individual, or a
trust or estate of which an individual specified in this
sentence is a substantial beneficiary; a trust, estate,
incompetent, conservatee, protected person, or minor of which
the individual is a fiduciary; or an entity of which the
individual is director, general partner, agent, employee or
the governing authority or member of the governing authority.
"(2) ASSOCIATE. When used to indicate a relationship
with:
"(A) a domestic or foreign entity or organization
for which the person is:
"(i) an officer or governing person; or
"(ii) a beneficial owner of 10 percent or more of a
class of voting ownership interests or similar securities of
the entity or organization;
"(B) a trust or estate in which the person has a
substantial beneficial interest or for which the person serves
as trustee or in a similar fiduciary capacity;
"(C) the person's spouse or a relative of the person
related by consanguinity or affinity within the fifth degree
who resides with the person; or
"(D) a governing person or an affiliate or officer
of the person.
"(3) ASSOCIATION. Includes, but is not limited to,
an unincorporated nonprofit association as defined in Section
10A-17-1.02(2) Chapter 17 and an unincorporated professional
association as defined in Section 10A-30-1.01(2) Article 1 of
Chapter 30.
"(4) BUSINESS CORPORATION. A domestic or foreign
corporation within the meaning of Section 10A-2-1.40(3) or
Section 10A-2-1.40(9) as defined in Chapter 2.
"(5) BUSINESS TRUST. A business trust within the
meaning of Section 10A-16-1.01 as defined in Chapter 16.
"(6) CERTIFICATE OF DISSOLUTION. Any document such
as a certificate of dissolution, statement of dissolution, or
articles of dissolution, required or permitted to be filed
publicly with respect to an entity's dissolution and winding
up of its business, activity, activities, not for profit
activity, or affairs.
"(6) (7) CERTIFICATE OF FORMATION.
"(A) the document required to be filed publicly
under Article 3, Chapter 5A or Chapter 9A to form a filing
entity; and
"(B) if appropriate, a restated certificate of
formation and all amendments of an original or restated
certificate of formation.
"(7) (8) CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP. An instrument
evidencing an ownership interest or membership interest in an
entity.
"(8) CERTIFICATE OF TERMINATION. Any document, such
as articles of dissolution in the case of a corporation, or
certificate of cancellation, in the case of a limited
partnership, required by law to be filed publicly with respect
to an entity's dissolution and the winding up of its affairs
or the end of its existence. In the case of an entity whose
separate existence ceases as a result of a merger, the
articles of merger shall constitute the certificate of
termination.
"(9) CERTIFICATED OWNERSHIP INTEREST. An ownership
interest of a domestic entity represented by a certificate
issued in bearer or registered form.
"(10) CERTIFICATION. Duly authenticated by the
proper officer of the state or county under the laws of which
a domestic or foreign entity is formed or filing officer of
the jurisdiction the laws of which govern the internal affairs
of an entity.
"(11) CONTRIBUTION. A tangible or intangible benefit
that a person transfers to an entity in consideration for an
ownership interest in the entity or otherwise in the person's
capacity as an owner or a member. In the case of an entity to
which Section 234 of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, now
appearing as Section 234 of the Official Recompilation of the
Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as amended, applies, the
benefit that may constitute a contribution transferred in
exchange for an ownership interest or transferred in the
transferor's capacity as an owner or member shall be limited
to money, work or labor done, or property actually received.
For entities to which Section 234 does not apply, the A
benefit that may constitute a contribution transferred in
exchange for an ownership interest or transferred in the
transferor's capacity as an owner or member may include cash,
property, services rendered, a contract for services to be
performed, a promissory note or other obligation of a person
to pay cash or transfer property to the entity, or securities
or other interests in or obligations of an entity. In either
case, the benefit does not include cash or property received
by the entity:
"(A) with respect to a promissory note or other
obligation to the extent that the agreed value of the note or
obligation has previously been included as a contribution; or
"(B) that the person intends to be a loan to the
entity.
"(12) CONVERSION.
"(A) the continuance of a domestic entity as a
foreign entity of any type;
"(B) the continuance of a foreign entity as a
domestic entity of any type; or
"(C) the continuance of a domestic entity of one
type as a domestic entity of another type.
"(13) CONVERTED ENTITY. An entity resulting from a
conversion. The term converted entity is synonymous with the
term resulting entity.
"(14) CONVERTING ENTITY. An entity as the entity
existed before the entity's conversion.
"(15) COOPERATIVE. Includes an employee cooperative
within the meaning of Section 10A-11-1.02(2) as defined in
Chapter 11.
"(16) CORPORATION. Includes a domestic or foreign
business corporation within the meaning of Section
10A-2-1.40(3) or Section 10A-2-1.40(9), a as defined in
Chapter 2, a domestic or foreign nonprofit corporation within
the meaning of Section 10A-3-1.02(7) or Section 10A-3-1.02(4),
a as defined in Chapter 3, a domestic or foreign professional
corporation within the meaning of Section 10A-4-1.03(3) or
Section 10A-4-1.03(4) as defined in Chapter 4, and those
entities specified in Chapter 20 as corporate.
"(17) COURT. Every court and judge having
jurisdiction in a case.
"(18) DAY. When used in the computation of time
excludes the first day and includes the last day of the period
so computed, unless the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or
legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of
the next day that is not a Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal
holiday. When the period of time to be computed is less than 7
days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays
shall be excluded.
"(19) DEBTOR IN BANKRUPTCY. A person who is the
subject of:
"(A) an order for relief under the United States
bankruptcy laws, Title 11, United States Code, or comparable
order under a successor statute of general application; or
"(B) a comparable order under federal, state, or
foreign law governing insolvency.
"(20) DIRECTOR. An individual who serves on the
board of directors, by whatever name known, of a foreign or
domestic corporation.
"(21) DISTRIBUTION. A transfer of property,
including cash, from an entity to an owner or member of the
entity in the owner's or member's capacity as an owner or
member. The term includes a dividend, a redemption or purchase
of an ownership interest, or a liquidating distribution.
"(22) DOMESTIC. With respect to an entity, that the
entity is formed and exists under this title.
"(23) DOMESTIC ENTITY. An organization formed and
existing under this title.
"(24) EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS TITLE. January 1, 2011.
"(25) ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE. An electronic signature
as that term is defined in the Alabama Electronic Transactions
Act, Chapter 1A of Title 8, or any successor statute.
"(26) ENTITY. A domestic entity or foreign entity.
"(27) FILING ENTITY. A domestic entity that is a
corporation, limited partnership, including a limited
liability partnership, limited liability company, professional
association, employee cooperative corporation, or real estate
investment trust.
"(28) FILING INSTRUMENT. An instrument, document, or
statement that is required or authorized by this title to be
filed by or for an entity with the filing officer in
accordance with Article 4.
"(29) FILING OFFICER. The officer with whom a filing
instrument is required or permitted to be filed under Article
4 or under any other provision of this title.
"(30) FOREIGN. With respect to an entity, that the
entity is formed and existing under the laws of a jurisdiction
other than this state.
"(31) FOREIGN ENTITY. An organization formed and
existing under the laws of a jurisdiction other than this
state.
"(32) FOREIGN FILING ENTITY. A foreign entity that
registers or is required to register as a foreign entity under
Section 10A-1-7.01(a)(1) Article 7.
"(33) FOREIGN GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITY. A governmental
official, agency, or instrumentality of a jurisdiction other
than this state.
"(34) FOREIGN LIMITED LIABILITY LIMITED PARTNERSHIP.
A foreign limited liability limited partnership as defined in
Chapter 9A.
"(35) FOREIGN LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP. A
foreign limited liability partnership as defined in Chapter
8A.
"(34) (36) FOREIGN LIMITED PARTNERSHIP. A foreign
limited partnership within the meaning of Section
10A-9A-1.02(4) as defined in Chapter 9A.
"(35) (37) FOREIGN NONFILING ENTITY. A foreign
entity that is not a foreign filing entity.
"(36) (38) FUNDAMENTAL BUSINESS TRANSACTION. A
merger, interest exchange, conversion, or sale of all or
substantially all of an entity's assets.
"(37) (39) GENERAL PARTNER.
"(A) each partner in a general partnership; or
"(B) a person who is admitted to a limited
partnership as a general partner in accordance with the
governing documents of the limited partnership.
"(38) (40) GENERAL PARTNERSHIP. A partnership within
the meaning of Section 10A-8-1.02(3) as defined in Chapter 8A.
The term includes a registered limited liability partnership
within the meaning of Section 10A-8-1.02(7) as defined in
Chapter 8A.
"(39) (41) GOVERNING AUTHORITY. A person or group of
persons who are entitled to manage and direct the affairs of
an entity under this title and the governing documents of the
entity, except that if the governing documents of the entity
or this title divide the authority to manage and direct the
affairs of the entity among different persons or groups of
persons according to different matters, governing authority
means the person or group of persons entitled to manage and
direct the affairs of the entity with respect to a matter
under the governing documents of the entity or this title. The
term includes the board of directors of a corporation, by
whatever name known, or other persons authorized to perform
the functions of the board of directors of a corporation, the
general partners of a general partnership or limited
partnership, the managers of a limited liability company that
is managed by managers, the members the persons who have
direction and oversight of a limited liability company, that
is managed by members who are entitled to manage the company,
and the trust managers of a real estate investment trust. The
term does not include an officer who is acting in the capacity
of an officer.
"(40) (42) GOVERNING DOCUMENTS.
"(A) in the case of a domestic entity:
"(i) the certificate of formation for a domestic
filing entity or the document or agreement under which a
domestic nonfiling entity is formed; and
"(ii) the other documents or agreements, including
bylaws, partnership agreements of limited partnerships,
operating limited liability company agreements of limited
liability companies, or similar documents, adopted by the
entity under this title to govern the formation or the
internal affairs of the entity; or
"(B) in the case of a foreign entity, the
instruments, documents, or agreements adopted under the law of
its jurisdiction of formation to govern the formation or the
internal affairs of the entity.
"(41) (43) GOVERNING PERSON. A person serving as
part of the governing authority of an entity.
"(42) (44) INDIVIDUAL. A natural person and the
estate of an incompetent or deceased natural person.
"(43) (45) INSOLVENCY. The inability of a person to
pay the person's debts as they become due in the usual course
of business or affairs.
"(44) (46) INSOLVENT. A person who is unable to pay
the person's debts as they become due in the usual course of
business or affairs.
"(45) (47) JUDGE OF PROBATE. The judge of probate of
the county in which a domestic entity's certificate of
formation is filed, or, with respect to partnership statements
provided for in Section 10A-8-1.06 a statement of authority
under Chapter 8A, which is to be filed in the real property
records of a particular county, the judge of probate of the
county in which a that statement is filed.
"(46) (48) JURISDICTION OF FORMATION.
"(A) in the case of a domestic filing entity, this
state;
"(B) in the case of a foreign filing entity, the
jurisdiction in which the entity's certificate of formation or
similar organizational instrument is filed,; or or if no
certificate of formation or similar organizational instrument
is filed, then the laws of the jurisdiction which govern the
initial affairs of the foreign entity;
"(C) in the case of a general partnership which has
filed a statement of partnership, a statement of not for
profit partnership, or a statement of limited liability
partnership in accordance with Chapter 8A, this state;
"(D) in the case of a foreign limited liability
partnership, the laws of the jurisdiction which govern the
filing of the foreign limited liability partnership's
statement of limited liability partnership or such filing in
that jurisdiction; and
"(E) in the case of a foreign or domestic nonfiling
entity other than those entities described in subsections (C)
or (D):
"(C) in the case of a foreign or domestic nonfiling
entity:
"(i) the jurisdiction the laws of which are chosen
in the entity's governing documents to govern its internal
affairs if that jurisdiction bears a reasonable relation to
the owners or members or to the domestic or foreign nonfiling
entity's business and affairs under the principles of this
state that otherwise would apply to a contract among the
owners or members; or
"(ii) if subparagraph (i) does not apply, the
jurisdiction in which the entity has its principal place of
business.
"(47) (49) LAW. Unless the context requires
otherwise, both statutory and common law.
"(48) (50) LICENSE. A license, certificate of
registration, or other legal authorization.
"(49) (51) LICENSING AUTHORITY. The state court,
state regulatory licensing board, or other like agency which
has the power to issue a license or other legal authorization
to render professional services.
"(50) (52) LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited
liability company within the meaning of as defined in Chapter
5A.
"(53) LIMITED LIABILITY LIMITED PARTNERSHIP. A
limited liability limited partnership as defined in Chapter
9A.
"(54) LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP. A limited
liability partnership as defined in Chapter 8A.
"(51) (55) LIMITED PARTNER. A person who has been
admitted to a limited partnership as a limited partner as
provided by:
"(A) in the case of a domestic limited partnership,
Section 10A-9-3.01 or Section 10A-9A-3.01, as applicable
Chapter 9A; or
"(B) in the case of a foreign limited partnership,
the laws of its jurisdiction of formation.
"(52) (56) LIMITED PARTNERSHIP. A limited
partnership within the meaning of Section 10A-9-1.02(11) or
10A-9A-1.02(8), as applicable as defined in Chapter 9A. The
term includes a limited liability limited partnership as
defined in Chapter 9A.
"(53) (57) MANAGERIAL OFFICIAL. An officer or a
governing person.
"(54) (58) MEMBER.
"(A) a person defined as a member under Chapter 5A;
"(B) in the case of a nonprofit corporation governed
by Article Chapter 3, a person having membership rights in a
corporation in accordance with its governing documents as
provided in Section 10A-3-1.02(5) Chapter 3;
"(C) in the case of an employee cooperative
corporation governed by Chapter 11, a natural person who, as
provided in Section 10A-11-1.02(5) Chapter 11, has been
accepted for membership in and owns a membership share in an
employee cooperative;
"(D) in the case of a nonprofit association, a
person who, as provided in Section 10A-17-1.02(1) Chapter 17,
may participate in the selection of persons authorized to
manage the affairs of the nonprofit association or in the
development of its policy.
"(55) (59) MERGER.
"(A) the division of a domestic entity into two or
more new domestic entities or other organizations or into a
surviving domestic entity and one or more new domestic or
foreign entities or non-code organizations; or
"(B) the The combination of one or more domestic
entities with one or more domestic entities or non-code
organizations resulting in:
"(i) (A) one or more surviving domestic entities or
non-code organizations;
"(ii) (B) the creation of one or more new domestic
entities or non-code organizations, or one or more surviving
domestic entities or non-code organizations; or
"(iii) (C) one or more surviving domestic entities
or non-code organizations and the creation of one or more new
domestic entities or non-code organizations.
"(56) (60) NON-CODE ORGANIZATION. An organization
other than a domestic entity.
"(57) (61) NONFILING ENTITY. A domestic entity that
is not a filing entity. The term includes a domestic general
partnership, a registered limited liability partnership, and a
nonprofit association.
"(58) (62) NONPROFIT ASSOCIATION. An unincorporated
nonprofit association within the meaning of Section
10A-17-1.02(2) as defined in Chapter 17. The term does not
include a general partnership which has filed a statement of
not for profit partnership in accordance with Chapter 8A, a
limited partnership which is carrying on a not for profit
purpose, or a limited liability company which is carrying on a
not for profit purpose.
"(59) (63) NONPROFIT CORPORATION. A domestic or
foreign nonprofit corporation within the meaning of Section
10A-3-1.02(7) or Section 10A-3-1.02(4) as defined in Chapter
3.
"(60) (64) NONPROFIT ENTITY. An entity that is a
nonprofit corporation, nonprofit association, or other entity
that is organized solely for one or more nonprofit purposes.
"(61) (65) OFFICER. An individual elected,
appointed, or designated as an officer of an entity by the
entity's governing authority or under the entity's governing
documents.
"(62) (66) ORGANIZATION. A corporation, limited
partnership, or general partnership, limited liability
company, business trust, real estate investment trust, joint
venture, joint stock company, cooperative, association, bank,
insurance company, credit union, savings and loan association,
or other organization, regardless of whether the organization
is for profit, not for profit, nonprofit, domestic, or
foreign.
"(63) (67) ORGANIZER. A person, who need not be an
owner or member of the entity, who, having the capacity to
contract, is authorized to execute documents in connection
with the formation of the entity.
"(64) (68) OWNER.
"(A) with respect to a foreign or domestic business
corporation or real estate investment trust, a shareholder;
"(B) with respect to a foreign or domestic
partnership, a partner;
"(C) with respect to a foreign or domestic limited
liability company or association, a member; and
"(D) with respect to another foreign or domestic
entity, an owner of an equity interest in that entity.
"(65) (69) OWNERSHIP INTEREST. An owner's interest
in an entity. The term includes the owner's share of profits
and losses or similar items and the right to receive
distributions. The term does not include an owner's right to
participate in management or participate in the direction or
oversight of the entity. An ownership interest is personal
property.
"(66) (70) PARENT ENTITY or PARENT ORGANIZATION. An
entity or organization that:
"(A) owns at least 50 percent of the ownership or
membership interest of a subsidiary; or
"(B) possesses at least 50 percent of the voting
power of the owners or members of a subsidiary.
"(67) (71) PARTNER. A limited partner or general
partner.
"(68) (72) PARTNERSHIP. Includes a general
partnership, a registered limited liability partnership, a
foreign registered limited liability partnership, a limited
partnership, a foreign limited partnership, a limited
liability limited partnership within the meaning of Section
10A-9-1.02(9) and Section 10A-9A-1.02(6), and a foreign
limited liability limited partnership within the meaning of
Section 10A-9-1.02(6) and Section 10A-9A-1.02(3).
"(69) (73) PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT. Any agreement
(whether referred to as a partnership agreement or otherwise),
written, oral or implied, of the partners as to the activities
and affairs of a general partnership or a limited partnership.
The partnership agreement includes any amendments to the
partnership agreement. In the case of limited partnerships
formed prior to October 1, 1998, partnership agreement
includes the certificate of partnership.
"(70) PARTNERSHIP INTEREST. In the case of a general
partnership the meaning set forth in Section 10A-8-1.02(5).
"(71) (74) PARTY TO THE MERGER. A domestic entity or
non-code organization that under a plan of merger is divided
or combined by a merger. The term does not include a domestic
entity or non-code organization that is not to be divided or
combined into or with one or more domestic entities or
non-code organizations, regardless of whether ownership
interests of the entity are to be issued under the plan of
merger.
"(72) (75) PERSON. An individual or an organization,
whether created by the laws of this state or another state or
foreign country, including, without limitation, a general
partnership, registered limited liability partnership, limited
partnership, limited liability limited partnership, limited
liability company, corporation, professional corporation,
professional association, trustee, personal representative,
fiduciary, as defined in Section 19-3-150 or person performing
in any similar capacity, business trust, estate, trust,
association, joint venture, government, governmental
subdivision, agency, or instrumentality, or any other legal or
commercial entity.
"(73) (76) PRESIDENT.
"(A) the individual designated as president of an
entity under the entity's governing documents; or
"(B) the officer or committee of persons authorized
to perform the functions of the principal executive officer of
an entity without regard to the designated name of the officer
or committee.
"(74) (77) PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATION. A professional
association within the meaning of Section 10A-30-1.01 as
defined in Chapter 30.
"(75) (78) PROFESSIONAL CORPORATION. A domestic or
foreign professional corporation within the meaning of Section
10A-4-1.03(2) or Section 10A-4-1.03(3) as defined in Chapter
4.
"(76) (79) PROFESSIONAL ENTITY. A professional
association or and a professional corporation.
"(77) (80) PROFESSIONAL SERVICE. Any type of service
that may lawfully be performed only pursuant to a license
issued by a state court, state regulatory licensing board, or
other like agency pursuant to state laws.
"(78) (81) PROPERTY. Includes all property, whether
real, personal, or mixed, or tangible and or intangible,
property and an or any right or interest in that property
therein.
"(79) (82) REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUST. An
unincorporated trust, association, or other entity within the
meaning of Section 10A-10-1.02(1) as defined in Chapter 10.
"(80) REGISTERED LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP. A
registered limited liability partnership within the meaning of
Section 10A-8-1.02(7).
"(81) (83) SECRETARY.
"(A) the individual designated as secretary of an
entity under the entity's governing documents; or
"(B) the officer or committee of persons authorized
to perform the functions of secretary of an entity without
regard to the designated name of the officer or committee.
"(82) (84) SECRETARY OF STATE. The Secretary of
State of the State of Alabama.
"(83) (85) SIGNATURE. Any symbol executed or adopted
by a person with present intention to authenticate a writing.
Unless the context requires otherwise, the term includes an
electronic signature and a facsimile of a signature.
"(84) (86) STATE. Includes, when referring to a part
of the United States, a state or commonwealth, and its
agencies and governmental subdivisions, and a territory or
possession, and its agencies and governmental subdivisions, of
the United States.
"(85) (87) SUBSCRIBER. A person who agrees with or
makes an offer to an entity to purchase by subscription an
ownership interest in the entity.
"(86) (88) SUBSCRIPTION. An agreement between a
subscriber and an entity, or a written offer made by a
subscriber to an entity before or after the entity's
formation, in which the subscriber agrees or offers to
purchase a specified ownership interest in the entity.
"(87) (89) SUBSIDIARY. An entity or organization at
least 50 percent of:
"(A) the ownership or membership interest of which
is owned by a parent entity or parent organization; or
"(B) the voting power of which is possessed by a
parent entity or parent organization.
"(88) (90) TREASURER.
"(A) the individual designated as treasurer of an
entity under the entity's governing documents; or
"(B) the officer or committee of persons authorized
to perform the functions of treasurer of an entity without
regard to the designated name of the officer or committee.
"(89) (91) TRUSTEE. A person who serves as a trustee
of a trust, including a real estate investment trust.
"(90) (92) UNCERTIFICATED OWNERSHIP INTEREST. An
ownership interest in a domestic entity that is not
represented by a certificate in bearer or registered form.
"(91) (93) VICE PRESIDENT.
"(A) the individual designated as vice president of
an entity under the governing documents of the entity; or
"(B) the officer or committee of persons authorized
to perform the functions of the president of the entity on the
death, absence, or resignation of the president or on the
inability of the president to perform the functions of office
without regard to the designated name of the officer or
committee.
"(92) (94) WRITING or WRITTEN. Information that is
inscribed on a tangible medium or that is stored in an
electronic or other medium and is retrievable in perceivable
form.
"§10A-1-1.06.
"To the extent not inconsistent with the
Constitution of Alabama of 1901, and other statutes of this
state wherein the terms may be found, and as the context
requires, in this title or any other statute of this state:
"(1) a reference to certificate of formation
includes, in the case of a corporation, articles of
incorporation, certificate of incorporation, and charter; in
the case of limited partnership, a certificate of limited
partnership and a certificate of formation; in the case of a
limited liability company, certificate of formation and
articles of organization; and in the case of a business trust
or a real estate investment trust, declaration of trust and,
similarly, a reference to articles of incorporation,
certificate of incorporation, charter, certificate of limited
partnership, or articles of organization includes a
certificate of formation;
"(2) a reference to certificate of termination
includes, in the case of a corporation or a limited liability
company, articles of dissolution and statement of dissolution,
and in the case of a limited partnership, a certificate of
cancellation and a statement of dissolution; similarly, a
reference to articles of dissolution, includes statement of
dissolution, or certificate of cancellation includes
certificate of termination and certificate of dissolution,
and, similarly, a reference to certificate of termination
statement of dissolution includes articles of dissolution,
statement of dissolution, and certificate of dissolution, and
similarly, a reference to a statement certificate of
dissolution includes articles of dissolution, certificate of
termination, and certificate and statement of dissolution;
"(3) a reference to certificate of merger includes
articles of merger and statement of merger and similarly, a
reference to articles of merger includes certificate of merger
and statement of merger, and similarly, a reference to
statement of merger includes certificate of merger and
articles of merger;
"(4) a reference to authorized capital stock
includes authorized shares;
"(5) a reference to capital stock includes
authorized and issued shares, issued shares, and stated
capital;
"(6) a reference to a certificate of registration,
certificate of authority, statement of foreign limited
liability partnership, and permit to do transact business
includes registration;
"(7) a reference to stock and shares of stock
includes shares;
"(8) a reference to stockholder includes
shareholder; and
"(9) a reference to no par stock includes shares
without par value.
"§10A-1-1.08.
"(a) The provisions of this title as described by
this section may be cited as provided by this section.
"(b) Chapter 2 and the provisions of Chapter 1 to
the extent applicable to business corporations may be cited as
the Alabama Business Corporation Law.
"(c) Chapter 3 and the provisions of Chapter 1 to
the extent applicable to nonprofit corporations may be cited
as the Alabama Nonprofit Corporation Law.
"(d) Chapter 4 and the provisions of Chapter 1 to
the extent applicable to professional corporations may be
cited as the Alabama Professional Corporation Law.
"(e) Chapter 5A and the provisions of Chapter 1 to
the extent applicable to limited liability companies may be
cited as the Alabama Limited Liability Company Law of 2014.
"(f) Chapter 8 8A and the provisions of Chapter 1 to
the extent applicable to general partnerships may be cited as
the Alabama Uniform Partnership Law.
"(g) Chapter 9 and the provisions of Chapter 1 to
the extent applicable to limited partnerships may be cited as
the Alabama Uniform Limited Partnership Law. Chapter 9A and
the provisions of Chapter 1 to the extent applicable to
limited partnerships may be cited as the Alabama Limited
Partnership Law.
"(h) Chapter 10 and the provisions of Chapter 1 to
the extent applicable to real estate investment trusts may be
cited as the Alabama Real Estate Investment Trust Law.
"(i) Chapter 11 and the provisions of Chapter 1 and
Chapter 2 to the extent applicable to employee cooperative
corporations may be cited as the Alabama Employee Cooperative
Corporations Law.
"(j) Chapter 17 may be cited as the Alabama
Unincorporated Nonprofit Association Law.
"§10A-1-1.12.
"If For entities other than general partnerships, if
the formation of an entity does not occur when a certificate
of formation or similar instrument filed with the Secretary of
State or the judge of probate, as the case may be, or with a
foreign governmental authority takes effect, the law governing
the entity's formation and internal affairs is the law of the
entity's jurisdiction of formation.
"§10A-1-2.02.
"A domestic entity may not engage in a business, or
activity, not for profit activity, or any other activity,
whether or not for profit, that:
"(A) is expressly unlawful or prohibited by a law of
this state;
"(B) cannot lawfully be engaged in by that entity
under a law of this state; or
"(C) may not be engaged in by an entity without
first obtaining a license under the laws of this state to
engage in that business, or activity, not for profit activity,
or any other activity, whether or not for profit, and a
license cannot lawfully be granted to the entity.
"§10A-1-3.06.
"The formation and existence of a domestic filing
entity that is a converted entity in a conversion or that is
to be created under a plan of merger takes effect and
commences on the effectiveness of the conversion or merger, as
appropriate.
"§10A-1-3.17.
"(a) A restated certificate of formation must
accurately state the text of the previous certificate of
formation, regardless of whether the certificate of formation
is an original, corrected, or restated certificate, and
include:
"(1) each previous amendment to the certificate
being restated that is carried forward; and
"(2) each new amendment to the certificate being
restated.
"(b) A restated certificate of formation may omit:
"(1) the name and address of each organizer other
than the name and address of each general partner of a limited
partnership; and
"(2) any other information that may be omitted under
the provisions of this title applicable to the filing entity.
"(c) A restated certificate of formation that does
not make new amendments requiring owner approval to the
certificate of formation being restated must be accompanied
by:
"(1) a statement that (i) the restated certificate
of formation accurately states the text of the certificate of
formation being restated, as amended, restated, and corrected,
except for information omitted under subsection (b) and that ,
(ii) the restated certificate does not make new amendments
requiring owner approval, and, if it does not, that (iii) the
governing persons have adopted the restatement in the manner
required by this title and the governing documents of the
entity; and
"(2) any other information required by other
provisions of this title applicable to the filing entity.
"(d) A restated certificate of formation that makes
new amendments requiring owner approval to the certificate of
formation being restated must:
"(1) be accompanied by a statement that each new
amendment has been made in accordance with this title;
"(2) identify by reference or description each
added, altered, or deleted provision;
"(3) be accompanied by a statement that each
amendment has been approved in the manner required by this
title and the governing documents of the entity, including any
information required by this article to be set forth in an
amendment to the certificate of formation as to the owner
approval of the amendment;
"(4) be accompanied by a statement that the restated
certificate of formation:
"(A) accurately states the text of the certificate
of formation being restated and each amendment to the
certificate of formation being restated that is in effect, as
further amended by the restated certificate of formation; and
"(B) does not contain any other change in the
certificate of formation being restated except for information
omitted under subsection (b); and
"(5) include any other information required by the
chapter of this title applicable to the entity.
"§10A-1-3.32.
"(a) This section applies to entities other than (i)
corporations formed under Chapter 2 and, professional
corporations formed under Chapter 4, and real estate
investment trusts governed by Chapter 10, each of which is
governed by the separate recordkeeping requirements and record
inspections provisions of Chapter 2, and (ii) limited
liability companies formed under Chapter 5A, partnerships
governed by Chapter 8A, and limited partnerships formed under
Chapter 9A, each of which are governed by the separate
recordkeeping requirements and record inspection provisions of
Chapter 2 rather than by this section set forth in each
entity's respective chapter governing that entity.
"(b) With respect to an entity covered by this
section, the books and records maintained under the chapter of
this title applicable to the entity and any other books and
records of the entity, wherever situated, are subject to
inspection and copying at the reasonable request, and at the
expense of, any owner or member or the owner's or member's
agent or attorney during regular business hours. The right of
access extends to the legal representative of a deceased owner
or member or owner or member under legal disability. The
entity shall also provide former owners and members with
access to its books and records pertaining to the period
during which they were owners or members.
"(c) The governing documents of the entity may not
unreasonably restrict an owner's or member's right to
information or access to books and records.
"(d) Any agent or governing person of an entity who,
without reasonable cause, refuses to allow any owner or member
or the owner's or member's agent or legal counsel to inspect
any books or records of the entity shall be personally liable
to the agent or member for a penalty in an amount not to
exceed 10 percent of the fair market value of the ownership
interest of the owner or member, in addition to any other
damages or remedy.
"§10A-1-3.33.
"(a) An entity covered by Section 10A-1-3.32 shall
provide governing persons and their agents and attorneys
access to its books and records, including the books and
records required to be maintained under the chapter of this
title applicable to the entity and other books and records of
the entity for any purpose reasonably related to the governing
person's service as a governing person. The right of access
shall include the right to inspect and copy books and records
during ordinary business hours. An entity may impose a
reasonable charge covering the costs of labor and material for
copies of documents furnished.
"(b) An entity covered by Section 10A-1-3.32 shall
furnish to a governing person:
"(1) Without demand, any information concerning the
entity's business and affairs reasonably required for the
proper exercise of the governing person's rights and duties
under the entity's governing documents or this title; and
"(2) On demand, any other information concerning the
entity's business and affairs, except to the extent the demand
or the information demanded is unreasonable or otherwise
improper under the circumstances.
"(c) A court may require an entity covered by
Section 10A-1-3.32 to open the books and records of the
entity, including the books and records required to be
maintained by the entity under the chapter of this title
applicable to the entity, to permit a governing person to
inspect, make copies of, or take extracts from the books and
records or may require an entity to furnish the governing
person with information concerning the entity's business and
affairs on a showing by the governing person that:
"(1) the person is a governing person of the entity;
"(2) the person's purpose for inspecting the
entity's books and records under subsection (a) or in
obtaining information as to the entity's business and affairs
under subsection (b)(1) is reasonably related to the person's
service as a governing person or, in the case of information
as to the entity's business and affairs demanded under
subsection (b)(2), that neither the demand nor the information
demanded is unreasonable or otherwise improper under the
circumstances;
"(3) in the case of information as to the entity's
business and affairs described in subsection (b)(2), the
person has made demand for the information; and
"(4) the entity refused the person's access to the
books and records or to furnish information as to the entity's
business and affairs.
"(d) A court may award a governing person attorney
fees and any other proper relief in a suit under subsection
(c) to require an entity to open its books and records.
"§10A-1-3.41.
"(a) Ownership interests in a domestic entity may be
certificated or uncertificated.
"(b) The ownership interests in a business
corporation, real estate investment trust, or professional
corporation must be certificated unless the governing
documents of the entity or a resolution adopted by the
governing authority of the entity states that the ownership
interests are uncertificated. If a domestic entity changes the
form of its ownership interests from certificated to
uncertificated, a certificated ownership interest subject to
the change becomes an uncertificated ownership interest only
after the certificate is surrendered to the domestic entity.
"(c) Ownership interests in a domestic entity, other
than a domestic entity described in subsection (b), are
uncertificated unless this title or the governing documents of
the domestic entity state that the interests are certificated.
"(d) Unless an entity's chapter specially provides
otherwise, no certificate of a certificated ownership interest
shall be issued in bearer form.
"§10A-1-4.01.
"(a) A filing instrument must be:
"(1) signed by the person or persons required by
this title or the applicable chapter to execute, and to
verify, if required by the applicable chapter, the filing
instrument; and
"(2) delivered, together with one exact or conformed
copy and the additional exact or conformed copies as required
by Section 10A-1-4.02(b) or (e) or other provision of this
title, to the judge of probate or Secretary of State, as the
case may be under the provisions of Section 10A-1-4.02, in
person or by mail or courier, or, if permitted by the
respective filing officer, by facsimile or electronic
transmission or any other comparable form of delivery.
"(b) A person authorized by this title to sign a
filing instrument for an entity is not required to show
evidence of the person's authority as a requirement for
filing.
"(c) The execution of a filing instrument
constitutes an affirmation by each person executing the
instrument that the facts therein are true, under penalties
for perjury prescribed by Section 13A-10-103 or its successor.
"(d) If a person required by this title to execute
any filing instrument fails or refuses to do so, any person
who is adversely affected by the failure or refusal may
petition the circuit court for the judicial circuit in which
the county is located where under this title the filing
instrument would be filed, or if it would be filed with the
Secretary of State, in the circuit court in the county in
which the registered agent is located, and if no registered
agent is required, in the circuit court in the county in which
the entity has it principal place of business in this state,
and if the entity does not have a place of business in this
state, in the Circuit Court of Montgomery County, to direct
the execution of the filing instrument. If the court finds
that it is proper for the filing instrument to be executed and
that any person so designated has failed or refused to execute
the filing instrument, it shall order the judge of probate of
the county or the Secretary of State, as the case may be, to
record an appropriate filing instrument.
"§10A-1-4.02.
"(a) The following filing instruments shall be
delivered to the judge of probate for filing, except as the
chapter applicable to an entity or other provision of this
title provides for filing by the Secretary of State or another
filing officer:
"(2) certificates of termination dissolution, other
than a statement of dissolution of a general partnership or a
statement of cancellation by a limited liability partnership;
"(3) certificates of revocation of termination;
"(4) certificates of correction to any filing
instrument required to be delivered to the office of the judge
of probate for filing; and
"(5) any other filing instrument required or
permitted under this title to be delivered to the judge of
probate for filing.
"(b) Any of the following filing instruments
delivered to the office of the judge of probate for filing
shall be accompanied by an additional exact or conformed copy
to permit the judge of probate to transmit to the Secretary of
State a certified copy thereof as required by subsection (g):
"(1) certificates of formation;
"(2) amendments to certificates of formation that
alter the name of any entity;
"(3) restated certificates of formation;
"(4) certificates of termination dissolution;
"(5) certificates of revocation of termination; and
"(6) certificates of correction correcting any of
the foregoing filing instruments.
"(c) The following filing instruments shall be
delivered to the Secretary of State for filing:
"(1) certificates, or articles, or statements of
merger, statements of conversion, and articles of share
exchange;
"(2) registration statements or registrations of a
foreign entity for authority to transact business in this
state and any statements, notices or certificates of
withdrawal or termination or statements, notices, or
certificates evidencing the same or required or authorized
under Article 7 of this chapter;
"(3) the annual report of a business corporation,
which may be made as provided in Section 10A-2-16.22 by filing
with the Department of Revenue the public record information
required by Chapter 14A of Title 40, together with the
prescribed fee for the annual report;
"(4) for corporations created by an act of the
Legislature prior to the adoption of the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, or for entities which have resulted from a
merger, share exchange, or conversion, all filing instruments
required by this title to be delivered to the judge of probate
for filing shall be delivered to the Secretary of State for
filing;
"(5) any other filing instrument required or
permitted under this title to be delivered to the Secretary of
State for filing;
"(6) articles of correction of any filing instrument
required or permitted to be delivered to the Secretary of
State for filing; and
"(7) statements and any other document required or
permitted to be delivered to the Secretary of State for filing
under Chapter 8A; and
"(7) (8) any other filing instrument required or
permitted to be filed under this title and not expressly
required or permitted to be delivered to the Secretary of
State or judge of probate or other designated filing office
for filing.
"(d) The filing of partnership statements shall be
as provided in Section 10A-8-1.06.
"(e) (d) Certificates of merger, articles, or
statements of merger or articles of share exchange, and
statements of conversion delivered to the Secretary of State
for filing shall be accompanied by the additional number of
exact or conformed copies of articles as may be required for
purposes of subsection (g) (f) hereof.
"(f) (e) If the judge of probate or Secretary of
State, as the case may be, finds that a filing instrument
delivered under this section and Section 10A-1-4.01
substantially conforms to the provisions of this title that
apply to the entity and that all required fees have been paid,
and if, in the case of a certificate of formation or an
amendment to a certificate of formation that would change the
name of the entity, the judge of probate finds that the name
of the entity has been reserved under Section 10A-1-5.11
Article 5 of this chapter, the judge of probate or Secretary
of State, as the case may be, shall file it immediately upon
delivery by:
"(1) endorsing "filed," together with his or her
name and official title and the date and time of receipt on
the instrument and all copies required hereunder and on the
receipt for the filing fee;
"(2) accepting it into the filing system adopted by
the judge of probate or Secretary of State and assigning the
instrument a date of filing; and
"(3) delivering a copy thereof, endorsed as provided
in subdivision (1), with the filing fee receipt, or
acknowledgment of receipt of the instrument if no filing fee
is required, to the entity or its representative.
"(g) (f) In the case of any of the filing
instruments described in subsection (b), the judge of probate
shall within 10 days transmit a certified copy of the filing
instrument to the Secretary of State. In the case of
certificates, or articles, or statements of merger, statements
of conversion, or articles of share exchange, the Secretary of
State shall promptly transmit a certified copy thereof to the
office of the judge of probate of the county in which each
domestic entity's certificate of formation, if any, is filed.
"(h) (g) If the judge of probate or Secretary of
State, as the case may be, refuses to file a filing
instrument, he or she shall return it to the domestic or
foreign entity or its representative within seven days after
the filing instrument was delivered, together with a brief,
written explanation of the reason for his or her refusal.
"(i) (h) The judge of probate's or Secretary of
State's duty to file filing instruments under this title is
ministerial. His or her filing or refusing to file a filing
instrument does not:
"(1) affect the validity or invalidity of the filing
instrument in whole or in part;
"(2) relate to the correctness or incorrectness of
information contained in the filing instrument; or
"(3) create a presumption that the filing instrument
is valid or invalid or that information contained in the
filing instrument is correct or incorrect.
"(j)   (i) The Secretary of State shall keep an
alphabetical list of domestic and foreign entities, the
certificates of formation, the statements under Chapter 8A, or
statements or registrations for authority to transact business
in this state, for which are filed in his or her office,
together with the data contained in the filing instruments.
"§10A-1-4.25.
"(a) After the Secretary of State or the judge of
probate, as the case may be, files the certificate of
correction, the filing instrument is considered to have been
corrected on the date the filing instrument was originally
filed, except as otherwise provided by subsection (b).
"(b) As to a person who acted in reliance on the
filing instrument prior to its correction and who is adversely
affected by the that correction, the filing instrument is
considered to have been corrected on the date the certificate
of correction is filed.
"(c) An acknowledgment of filing or a similar
instrument issued by the Secretary of State or judge of
probate, as the case may be, before a filing instrument is
corrected, with respect to the effect of filing the original
filing instrument, applies to the corrected filing instrument
as of the date the corrected filing instrument is considered
to have been filed under this section.
"§10A-1-4.31.
"(a) The judge of probate or the Secretary of State,
as the case may be, shall collect the following fees when the
filing instruments described in this title are delivered to
him or her for filing:
"FILING INSTRUMENT         ALABAMA            OF PROBATE
"(1) Certificate of for-
mation and restated cer-
tificate of formation      $100               $50
"(2) Amendment to cer-
tificate of   formation    $50                $25
"(3) Name reservations
"A. less than 24 hours     $25                No fee
"B. 24 hours or more       $10                No fee
"(4) Certificate of ter-
mination dissolution
(other than a statement
of dissolution or can-
cellation under Chapter
8A)                        $100      $50
"(5) Certificate, arti-
cles, or statement of
merger; statement of
conversion, articles of
consolidation or share
exchange                   $100      $50
"(6) Foreign entity reg-
istration including
registration a statement
of foreign limited lia-
bility    partnership      $150      No fee
"(7) Certificate of ex-
istence
"A. Less than 24 hours     $25       No fee
"B. 24 hours or more       $10       No fee
" (8) Registered limited
liability    partnership
registration               $100      $50
"(9) Registered limited    $100      No fee
liability partnership
annual report (8) State-
ments and any document
required or permitted to
be filed with the Secre-
tary of State under
Chapter 8A
"(10) Partnership state-
ment (filing or    certi-
fying) (9) Certified
statements and any docu-
ment required or permit-
ted to be filed with the
judge of probate under
Chapter 8A                   $25            $25 $100
"(11) (10) Any other
filing instrument    re-
quired or permitted to
be filed under    this ti-
tle                          $25            $25
"(b) When appropriate, two checks shall accompany a
filing instrument delivered to the judge of probate or the
Secretary of State for filing, one payable to the judge of
probate for all charges for the judge of probate, and one
payable to the State of Alabama covering all charges for the
Secretary of State. In the case of any filing instrument
delivered for filing to the judge of probate accompanied by a
check for the charges for the Secretary of State, the check
for the Secretary of State shall be forwarded by the judge of
probate to the Secretary of State. In the case of any filing
instrument delivered for filing to the Secretary of State
accompanied by a check for the judge of probate, the check for
the judge of probate shall be forwarded by the Secretary of
State to the judge of probate.
"(c) There is hereby established in the State
Treasury a fund to be known and designated as the Secretary of
State Entity Fund. All funds, fees, charges, costs, and
collections accruing to or collected by the Secretary of State
under the foregoing provisions of this section or any other
fees collected by the Secretary of State relating to entities
shall be deposited into the State Treasury to the credit of
the Secretary of State Entity Fund except as so provided in
subsection (e).
"(d) All funds now or hereafter deposited in the
State Treasury to the credit of the Secretary of State Entity
Fund shall not be expended for any purpose whatsoever unless
the same shall have been allotted and budgeted in accordance
with the provisions of Article 4 of Chapter 4 of Title 41, and
only in the amounts and for the purposes provided by the
Legislature in the general appropriation bill or this section.
"(e) Seventy percent of funds collected by the
Secretary of State in relation to entities during the fiscal
year shall be deposited to the credit of the State General
Fund.
"(f) The fees herein imposed for the office of the
judge of probate shall be charged and paid into the
appropriate county treasury or to the judge of probate as may
be authorized or required by law.
"(g) The Secretary of State shall collect the
following fees for copying and certifying the copy of any
filing instrument relating to a domestic or foreign entity:
"(1) One dollar fifty cents ($1.50) Two dollars
($2.00) a page for copying; and
"(2) Five dollars ($5) Ten dollars ($10) for the
certificate.
"(h) The judge of probate shall collect the
following fees for copying and certifying the copy of any
filing instrument relating to an entity:
"(1) One dollar fifty cents ($1.50) Two dollars
($2.00) a page for copying; and
"(2) Five dollars ($5) Ten dollars ($10) for the
certificate.
"(i) For requests of immediate expedition of
documents to be obtained in less than 24 hours, other than
name reservations and certificates of existence, by the
Secretary of State regarding document filings, certifications,
and certificates in addition to required fees, a one hundred
dollar ($100) surcharge shall be imposed.
"§10A-1-5.01.
"The filing of a certificate of formation by a
filing entity under this title, an application for
registration or statement of foreign limited liability
partnership by a foreign filing entity under this title, or an
application for reservation or registration of a name under
this article does not authorize the use of a name in this
state in violation of a right of another under:
"(1) the Trademark Act of 1946, as amended, 15
U.S.C. Section 1051 et seq.; or
"(2) Chapter 12 of Title 8; or
"(3) Common law.
"§10A-1-5.02.
"A filing domestic entity, and or a foreign filing
entity registered to transact business in this state with
registration under Article 7, may not have a name that
contains any word phrase that indicates or implies that the
entity is engaged in a business that the entity is not
authorized by law to pursue.
"§10A-1-5.03.
"(a) A filing domestic entity may not have a name
and a foreign filing entity may not register to transact
business in this state under a name that is the same as or not
distinguishable on the records of the Secretary of State from:
"(1) the name of another existing filing entity or
registered a general partnership that has an effective
statement of partnership, statement of not for profit
partnership, or limited liability partnership with an
effective current registration under Chapter 8A;
"(2) the name of a foreign filing entity that is
registered has a registration under Article 7;
"(3) a name that is reserved under Division B.
"(b) Subsection (a) does not apply if the other
entity or the person for whom the name is reserved consents in
writing to the use of a name not distinguishable on the
records of the Secretary of State, and submits an undertaking
in form satisfactory to the Secretary of State to change its
name to a name that is distinguishable on the records of the
Secretary of State from the name for which application was
made.
"(c) In determining whether a name is the same as or
not distinguishable on the records of the Secretary of State
from the name of another entity, words, phrases, or
abbreviations indicating the type of entity, such as
"corporation," "corp.," "general partnership," "GP," "G.P.,"
not for profit general partnership, "NGP," "N.G.P.,"
"incorporated," "Inc.," "limited liability company," "LLC,"
"L.L.C." "limited partnership," "LP," "L.P.," "Ltd.," "limited
liability limited partnership," "LLLP," "L.L.L.P." "limited
liability partnership," "LLP," or "L.L.P." "registered limited
liability partnership," "RLLP," "limited liability company,"
or "LLC" shall not be taken into account unless waived in
writing by the incumbent holder of the name.
"§10A-1-5.04.
"(a) The name of a corporation or foreign
corporation registered to transact business in this state must
contain:
"(1) the word "corporation" or "incorporated"; or
"(2) an abbreviation of one of those words.
"(b) Subsection (a) does not apply to a nonprofit
corporation or foreign nonprofit corporation, or to banks,
trust companies, savings and loan associations, or insurance
companies.
"(c) In lieu of a word or abbreviation required by
subsection (a), the name of a professional corporation must
comply with the requirements of Section 10A-1-5.08.
"(d) The requirements of subsection (a) do not apply
to any corporation organized before January 1, 1981.
"§10A-1-5.05.
"(a) The name of a limited partnership or a foreign
limited partnership registered to transact business in this
state may contain the name of any partner.
"(b) The name of a limited partnership that is not a
limited liability limited partnership must contain the phrase
"limited partnership" or "Limited," or the abbreviation
"L.P.," "LP," or "Ltd." and must not contain the phrase
"limited liability limited partnership" or the abbreviation
"LLLP" or "L.L.L.P."
"(c) The name of a limited liability limited
partnership must contain the phrase "limited liability limited
partnership" or the abbreviation "LLLP" or "L.L.L.P." and must
not contain the abbreviation "L.P.," "LP," or "Ltd."
"(d) Subject to Section 10A-1-7.07, this section
applies to any foreign limited partnership transacting
business in this state, having a certificate of authority to
transact business in this state, or applying for a certificate
of authority.
"(e) The name of a limited partnership may not
contain the following words: "bank," "banking," "banker,"
"trust," "insurance," "insurer," "corporation,"
"incorporated," or any abbreviation of such words.
"§10A-1-5.06.
"The name of a limited liability company or a
foreign limited liability company doing registered to transact
business in this state must contain the words "Limited
Liability Company" or the abbreviation "L.L.C." or "LLC".
"§10A-1-5.08.
"The name of a domestic professional corporation or
of a foreign professional corporation registered to transact
business in Alabama this state must contain the words
"professional corporation" or the abbreviation "P.C." or "PC"
and shall otherwise conform to any rule promulgated by a
licensing authority having jurisdiction of a professional
service described in the certificate of formation of the
corporation."
Section 2. Section 10A-1-5.10 is added to the Code
of Alabama 1975, to read as follows:
(a) The name of a general partnership that has filed
a statement of partnership in accordance with Section
10A-8A-2.02 must include the words "general partnership" or
the abbreviation "G.P." or "GP".
(b) The name of a general partnership that has filed
a statement of not for profit partnership in accordance with
Section 10A-8A-2.02 must include the words "not for profit
general partnership" or the abbreviation "N.G.P." or "NGP".
Section 3. Sections 10A-1-5.11, 10A-1-5.12,
10A-1-5.31, 10A-1-5.32, 10A-1-5.33, 10A-1-7.01, 10A-1-7.02,
10A-1-7.03, 10A-1-7.04, 10A-1-7.05, and 10A-1-7.06, Section
10A-1-7.07, as amended by Act 2016-379, 2016 Regular Session,
10A-1-7.11, 10A-1-7.12, 10A-1-7.13, 10A-1-7.14, 10A-1-7.22,
10A-1-7.23, 10A-1-7.24, 10A-1-7.31, 10A-1-7.32, 10A-1-7.34,
10A-1-7.36, 10A-1-7.37, 10A-1-8.01, 10A-1-8.02, 10A-1-8.03,
10A-1-9.01, and 10A-1-9.02 of the Code of Alabama 1975, are
amended to read as follows:
"§10A-1-5.11.
"(a) A person shall To reserve the exclusive use of
an entity name, including a fictitious name for a foreign
entity whose name is not available, by delivering a person
must deliver an application to the Secretary of State for
filing. Any person may file an application with the Secretary
of State to reserve the exclusive use of a name under this
article.
"(b) The application must set forth the name and
address of the applicant and the name proposed to be reserved
and must be:
"(1) accompanied by any required filing fee; and
"(2) signed by the applicant or by the agent or
attorney of the applicant.
"(c) The name may also be reserved by electronic
means, subject to the requirements as the Secretary of State
may establish for reservation of names by means, including
requirements for payment of the fee for name reservation.
"§10A-1-5.12.
"(a) The Secretary of State may not reserve a name
that is the same as, or not distinguishable on the records of
the Secretary of State from:
"(1) the name of an existing filing entity or
registered; the name of a general partnership that has an
effective statement of partnership, statement of not for
profit partnership, or statement of limited liability
partnership with an effective registration on file with the
Secretary of State under Chapter 8A;
"(2) the name of a foreign filing entity that is
registered has a registration under Article 7; or
"(3) a name that is reserved under this division.
"(b) Subsection (a) does not apply if the other
entity or the person for whom the name is reserved consents in
writing to the subsequent reservation of a name not
distinguishable on the records of the Secretary of State, and
submits an undertaking in form satisfactory to the Secretary
of State to change its name to a name that is distinguishable
on the records of the Secretary of State from the name applied
for or, if the conflict is with a reserved or registered name,
transfers its reservation to the applicant pursuant to Section
10A-1-5.16.
"§10A-1-5.31.
"(a) Each filing entity, each foreign filing entity,
each foreign registered limited liability partnership
registered pursuant to Article 7, and any registered with a
registration under Article 7, and each general partnership
that has an effective statement of partnership, statement of
not for profit partnership, or statement of limited liability
partnership that does not maintain a place of business in this
state on file with the Secretary of State in accordance with
Chapter 8A, shall designate and continuously maintain in this
state:
"(1) a registered agent; and
"(2) a registered office.
"(b) A registered agent:
"(1) is an agent of the entity on which may be
served any process, notice, or demand required or permitted by
law to be served on the entity;
"(2) may be:
"(A) an individual who is a resident of this state;
or
"(B) a domestic entity or a foreign entity that is
registered to do transact business in this state; and
"(3) must maintain a business office at the same
address as the entity's registered office.
"(c) The registered office:
"(1) must be located at a street address where
process may be personally served on the entity's registered
agent;
"(2) is not required to be a place of business of
the filing entity or foreign filing entity; and
"(3) may not be solely a mailbox service or a
telephone answering service.
"§10A-1-5.32.
"(a) A filing An entity, registered limited
liability partnership required to maintain a registered office
and registered agent under Section 10A-1-5.31(a), or foreign
filing entity or other foreign entity required to register in
this state pursuant to Section 10A-1-7.01, may change its
registered office, its registered agent, or both, by
delivering to the Secretary of State for filing a statement of
the change in accordance with the procedures in Article 4.
"(b) The statement must contain:
"(1) the name of the entity;
"(2) the name of the entity's registered agent;
"(3) the street address of the entity's registered
agent;
"(4) if the change relates to the registered agent,
the name of the entity's new registered agent and the new
registered agent's written consent to the appointment, either
on the statement or attached to it;
"(5) if the change relates to the registered office,
the street address of the entity's new registered office;
"(6) a recitation that the change specified in the
statement is authorized by the entity; and
"(7) a recitation that the street address of the
registered office and the street address of the registered
agent's business are the same.
"(c) On acceptance of the statement by the Secretary
of State, the statement is:
"(1) in the case of a domestic filing entity,
effective to change the designation of the entity's registered
agent or registered office, or both, without the necessity of
amending the entity's certificate of formation;
"(2) in the case of a domestic registered general
partnership with an effective statement of partnership,
statement of not for profit partnership, or statement of
limited liability partnership on file with the Secretary of
State under Chapter 8A, effective to change its registered
agent or registered office, or both, without the necessity of
amending its registration as a statement of partnership,
statement of not for profit partnership, or statement of
limited liability partnership filed under Section 10A-8-10.01
Chapter 8A;
"(3) in the case of a foreign filing entity other
than a foreign limited liability partnership, effective to
change the designation of the entity's registered agent or
registered office, or both, and effective as an amendment of
its application for registration as a foreign entity under
Article 7; or
"(4) in the case of a foreign registered limited
liability partnership, effective to change the designation of
its registered agent or registered office, or both, without
the necessity of amending its registration as a statement of
foreign limited liability partnership filed under Section
10A-8-10.01, and effective as an amendment to its application
for registration as a foreign entity under Article 7.
"§10A-1-5.33.
"(a) The registered agent of any entity required by
Section 10A-1-5.31 to designate and maintain a registered
agent or registered office may change its name, its address as
the address of the entity's registered office, or both, by
delivering to the Secretary of State for filing a statement of
the change in accordance with the procedures in Article 4.
"(b) The statement must be signed by the registered
agent, or a person authorized to sign the statement on behalf
of the registered agent, and must contain:
"(1) the name of the entity represented by the
registered agent;
"(2) the name of the entity's registered agent and
the address at which the registered agent maintained the
entity's registered office;
"(3) if the change relates to the name of the
registered agent, the new name of that agent;
"(4) if the change relates to the address of the
registered office, the new address of that office; and
"(5) a recitation that written notice of the change
was given to the entity at least 10 days before the date the
statement is filed.
"(c) On acceptance of the statement by the Secretary
of State, the statement is:
"(1) in the case of a domestic filing entity,
effective to make the change set forth in the statement
without the necessity of amending the entity's certificate of
formation;
"(2) in the case of a domestic registered general
partnership with an effective statement of partnership,
statement of not for profit partnership, or statement of
limited liability partnership on file with the Secretary of
State, effective to make the change set forth in the statement
its registered agent or registered office, or both, without
the necessity of amending its registration as a statement of
partnership, statement of not for profit partnership, or
statement of limited liability partnership filed under Section
10A-8-10.01 Chapter 8A;
"(3) in the case of a foreign filing entity,
effective to make the change set forth in the statement, and
effective as an amendment of its application for registration
as a foreign entity under Article 7; or
"(4) in the case of a foreign registered limited
liability partnership, effective to make the change set forth
in the statement, and effective as an amendment to its
application for registration as a statement of foreign entity
limited liability partnership under Article 7.
"(d) A registered agent may file a statement under
this section that applies to more than one entity.
"§10A-1-7.01.
"(a)(1) For purposes of this Article 7, the terms
register, registering, and registered include (i) a foreign
entity other than a foreign limited liability partnership
delivering to the Secretary of State for filing an application
for registration and the Secretary of State filing the
application for registration, and (ii) a foreign limited
liability partnership delivering to the Secretary of State for
filing a statement of foreign limited liability partnership
and the Secretary of State filing the statement of foreign
limited liability partnership.
"(2) For purposes of this Article 7, the term
registration includes (i) a filed application for registration
and (ii) a filed statement of foreign limited liability
partnership.
"(3) For purposes of this Article 7, the terms
transact business and transacting business shall include
conducting a business, activity, not for profit activity, and
any other activity, whether or not for profit.
"(a) (b) To transact business in this state, a
foreign entity must register under this chapter if the foreign
entity:
"(1) is a foreign entity, the formation of which, if
formed in this state, would require the filing under Article 3
of a certificate of formation; or
"(2) is a foreign limited liability partnership; or
"(2) (3) affords limited liability under the law of
its jurisdiction of formation for any owner or member.
"(b) (c) A foreign entity described by subsection
(a) (b) must maintain the entity's registration while
transacting business in this state.
"§10A-1-7.02.
"(a) A foreign entity not described by Section
10A-1-7.01(a) (b) may transact business in this state without
registering under this chapter.
"(b) Subsection (a) does not relieve a foreign
entity from the duty to comply with applicable requirements
under other law to file or register.
"(c) A foreign entity is not required to register
under this chapter if other law of this state or of federal
law authorizes the foreign entity to transact the particular
business authorized by law in this state.
"(d) A foreign unincorporated nonprofit association
is not required to register under this chapter.
"(e) A foreign entity which is exempt from the
requirements of Chapter 46 of Title 16, is not required to
register under this chapter.
"§10A-1-7.03.
"A foreign entity that is eligible under other law
of this state to register to transact business in this state,
but that is not registered under that law, may register under
this chapter unless that registration registering is
prohibited by the other law. The A registration under this
chapter confers only the authority provided by this chapter.
"§10A-1-7.04.
"(a) A foreign filing entity registers by filing an
application for registration as provided by Article 4. (1) A
foreign entity described in Section 10A-1-7.01(b) other than a
foreign limited liability partnership, registers by delivering
to the Secretary of State for filing an application for
registration in accordance with the procedures in Article 4.
"(2) A foreign limited liability partnership
registers by delivering to the Secretary of State for filing a
statement of foreign limited liability partnership in
accordance with the procedures in Article 4.
"(b) The application for registration of a foreign
entity described in Section 10A-1-7.01(b) other than a foreign
limited liability partnership must state:
"(1) the foreign entity's name or, if that name is
not available for use in this state or otherwise would not
comply with Article 5, a name that satisfies the requirements
of Section 10A-1-7.07 under which the entity will transact
business in this state;
"(2) the foreign entity's type;
"(3) the foreign entity's jurisdiction of formation;
"(4) the date of the foreign entity's formation;
"(5) that the foreign entity exists as a valid
foreign filing entity of the stated type under the laws of the
foreign entity's jurisdiction of formation;
"(6) the date the foreign entity began or will begin
to transact business in this state;
"(7) the street address and mailing address, if
different, of the principal office of the foreign filing
entity and;
"(8) the street address and mailing address, if
different, of the initial registered office and the name of
the initial registered agent for service of process which
Article 5 requires to be maintained at that office.
"(c) A foreign filing entity may register regardless
of any differences between the law of the entity's
jurisdiction and of this state applicable to the governing of
the internal affairs or to the liability of an owner, member,
or managerial official. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no
foreign filing entity may carry on in this state any business
of a character that may not lawfully be carried on by a
domestic filing entity of the same type.
"(d) In the case of a foreign corporation filing an
application pursuant to this section, the foreign corporation
shall also, to the extent required by the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, file a copy of its articles or certificate of
incorporation or association or other certificate of formation
and all amendments thereto duly certified by the Secretary of
State or other official having custody of corporate records in
the state or other jurisdiction under whose law it is
incorporated.
"(c) The statement of foreign limited liability
partnership must state:
"(1) the foreign limited partnership's name or, if
that name is not available for use in this state or otherwise
would not comply with Article 5, a name that satisfies the
requirements of Section 10A-1-7.07 under which the foreign
entity will transact business in this state;
"(2) the jurisdiction which governs the foreign
limited liability partnership's partnership agreement and
under which it is a limited liability partnership;
"(3) the date of the foreign limited liability
partnership's formation;
"(4) that the foreign limited liability partnership
exists as a valid foreign limited liability partnership under
the laws of the jurisdiction which governs the foreign limited
liability partnership's partnership agreement and under which
it is a limited liability partnership;
"(5) the date the foreign limited liability
partnership will begin to transact business in this state;
"(6) the street address and mailing address, if
different, of the principal office of the foreign limited
liability partnership;
"(7) the street address and mailing address, if
different, of the initial registered office and the name of
the initial registered agent for service of process which
Article 5 requires to be maintained at that office;
"(d) The application for registration of a foreign
entity described in Section 10A-1-7.01(b) other than a foreign
limited liability partnership shall be executed by one or more
persons authorized to execute an application for registration.
The statement of foreign limited liability partnership shall
be executed by one or more partners authorized to execute a
statement of foreign limited liability partnership.
"(e) The status of the foreign entity after
registration and the liability of its owners, managers,
members, or managerial officials shall not be adversely
affected by error or subsequent changes in the information
stated in the application for registration or statement of
foreign limited liability partnership, as applicable.
"(f) The fact that an application for registration
or a statement of foreign limited liability partnership, as
applicable, is on file with the Secretary of State is notice
that the foreign entity is authorized to transact business in
this state and as notice of all facts required to be set forth
in the application for registration or the statement of
foreign limited liability partnership, as applicable.
"(g) A foreign entity may register regardless of any
differences between the law of the foreign entity's
jurisdiction and of this state applicable to the governing of
the internal affairs or to the liability of an owner, member,
or managerial official. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no
foreign entity may carry on in this state any business of a
character that may not lawfully be carried on by a domestic
entity of the same type.
"(h) A statement of foreign limited liability
partnership is a filing instrument.
"§10A-1-7.05.
"(a) The application for registration of a foreign
entity and the statement of foreign limited liability
partnership takes effect in accordance with Article 4 of this
chapter. The registration of a foreign entity is effective
when the application filed under Article 4 takes effect. The
registration remains in effect until the registration
terminates, is withdrawn, or is revoked.
"(b) Except in a proceeding to revoke the
registration of a foreign entity or as otherwise provided by
the law of Alabama, the Secretary of State's issuance of an
acknowledgment that the foreign entity has filed an
application for registration or a statement of foreign limited
liability partnership, as applicable, is conclusive evidence
of the authority of the foreign filing entity to transact
business in this state under the foreign entity's name or
under another name stated in the application, for registration
in accordance with Section 10A-1-7.04(b)(1) or stated in the
statement of foreign limited liability partnership in
accordance with Section 10A-1-7.04(c)(1), as applicable.
"§10A-1-7.06.
"(a) If any statement in the an application for
registration of a or a statement of foreign entity limited
liability partnership was false when made or any arrangements
or other facts described have changed, making the application
for registration or statement of foreign limited liability
partnership, as applicable, inaccurate in any respect, the
foreign entity shall file with the Secretary of State an
amendment correcting the false or inaccurate statement. A
foreign filing entity must amend its registration to change
its name if the name has changed. If the entity's name of a
foreign entity as changed is not available in this state or
otherwise does not satisfy the requirements of Article 5, the
foreign entity, pursuant to the requirements of Section
10A-1-7.07, must adopt a name that complies with Article 5
under which it will transact business in this state.
"(b) A foreign filing entity may amend its
application for registration or statement of foreign limited
liability partnership by filing an application for amendment
of registration as provided by Article 4.
"(c) The application for amendment must be filed
promptly on the discovery that any statement in the
application for registration or statement of foreign limited
liability partnership, as applicable, was false when made, but
not later than 60 days after the discovery. The application
for amendment must be filed promptly after any arrangements
other facts described in the application have changed, making
the application inaccurate in any respect, but not later than
90 days after the change.
"§10A-1-7.07.
"If the name of a foreign entity does not satisfy
the requirements of Article 5, the foreign entity, for use in
this state, may:
"(1) if a corporation, add to its corporate name the
word "corporation" or "incorporated" or an abbreviation of one
of the words;
"(2) if a banking corporation, add to its corporate
name the words "bank," "banking," or "bankers";
"(3) if a limited partnership that is not a limited
liability limited partnership, add to its partnership name the
word "limited" or the abbreviation "Ltd." or the phrase
"limited partnership" or the abbreviation "L.P." or "LP" but
its name must not contain the phrase "limited liability
limited partnership" or the abbreviation "LLLP" or "L.L.L.P.";
"(4) if a limited partnership that is a limited
liability limited partnership, add to its partnership name the
phrase "limited liability limited partnership" or the
abbreviation "LLLP" or "L.L.L.P." and must not contain the
abbreviation "Ltd.," "L.P.," or "LP."
"(5) if a limited liability company, add to its
company name the phrase "limited liability company" or the
abbreviation "L.L.C." or "LLC";
"(6) if a professional corporation, add to its
corporate name the phrase "professional corporation" or the
abbreviation "P.C." or "PC";
"(7) if a registered limited liability partnership,
add to its partnership name the phrase "registered limited
liability partnership" or the abbreviation "L.L.P." or "LLP";
and
"(8) if a general partnership that is authorized by
the laws of the jurisdiction that govern its partnership
agreement to file the equivalent of a statement of partnership
as provided under Chapter 8A, add to its name the phrase
"general partnership" or the abbreviation "G.P." or "GP";
"(9) if a general partnership that is authorized by
the laws of the jurisdiction that govern its partnership
agreement to file the equivalent of a statement of not for
profit partnership as provided under Chapter 8A, add to its
name the phrase "not for profit general partnership" or the
abbreviation "N.G.P." or "NGP"; and
"(8) (10) use a fictitious name available for use in
this state that satisfies the requirements of Article 5, if it
delivers to the Secretary of State for filing a copy of the
resolution of its governing authority, certified by its
secretary, adopting the fictitious name.
"§10A-1-7.11.
"(a) A foreign filing entity registered in this
state may withdraw the foreign entity's registration at any
time by filing a certificate of withdrawal as provided in
Article 4.
"(b) A certificate of withdrawal for a foreign
entity described must state:
"(1) the name of the foreign filing entity as
registered in this state set forth on its registration;
"(2) the type of entity and the entity's
jurisdiction of formation, and in the case of a foreign
limited liability partnership, the jurisdiction which laws
govern the foreign limited liability partnership and its
partnership agreement;
"(3) the street address and mailing address, if
different, of the principal office of the foreign filing
entity;
"(4) that the foreign filing entity no longer is
transacting business in this state;
"(5) that the foreign filing entity:
"(A) revokes the authority of the foreign entity's
registered agent in this state to accept service of process;
and
"(B) consents that service of process in any action,
suit, or proceeding stating a cause of action arising in this
state during the time the foreign filing entity was authorized
to transact business in this state may be made on the foreign
filing entity in accordance with the Alabama Rules of Civil
Procedure and any other notice or demand required or permitted
by law to be served on the foreign entity may be served in a
manner similar to the procedure provided for the service of
process by the Alabama Rules of Civil Procedure;
"(6)(A) a mailing address to which process may be
mailed pursuant to the applicable service of process
procedures of the Alabama Rules of Civil Procedure and to
which any notice or demand required or permitted by law to be
served on the foreign entity may be mailed; and
"(B) a commitment by the foreign entity that if the
mailing address stated in the certificate of withdrawal under
paragraph (A) changes, the foreign entity will promptly amend
the certificate of withdrawal to update the address; and
"(7) that any money due or accrued to the state has
been paid or describes the provisions that have been made for
the payment of that money.
"(c) A certificate from the Alabama Department of
Revenue that all applicable taxes and fees have been paid must
be filed with the certificate of withdrawal.
"(d) If the existence or separate existence of a
foreign filing entity registered in this state terminates
because of dissolution, termination, merger, conversion, or
other circumstances, a certificate by an authorized
governmental official of the entity's jurisdiction of
formation that evidences the termination shall be filed with
the Secretary of State.
"(e) The registration of the foreign filing entity
in this state terminates when a certificate of withdrawal
under this section or a certificate evidencing termination
under subsection (d) is filed.
"§10A-1-7.12.
"The Secretary of State may commence a proceeding
under Section 10A-1-7.13 to revoke the registration of a
foreign entity authorized to transact business in this state
if:
"(1) the foreign entity does not deliver its annual
report, if required by law, to the Secretary of State within
180 days after it is due;
"(2) the foreign entity does not pay within 180 days
after they are due any applicable privilege or corporation
share tax, qualification fee or admission tax, or interest or
penalties imposed by this title or other law;
"(3) the foreign entity is without a registered
agent or registered office in this state for 60 days or more;
"(4) the foreign entity does not file a statement of
change of registered agent or registered office with the
Secretary of State under Section 10A-1-5.32 within 60 days of
the change or its registered agent does not file a change of
name or change of address of the registered office with the
Secretary of State under Section 10A-1-5.33 within 60 days of
the change;
"(5) an organizer, governing person, or agent of the
foreign entity signed a document he or she knew was false in
any material respect with intent that the document be
delivered to the Secretary of State for filing; or
"(6) the Secretary of State receives a duly
authenticated certificate from the Secretary of State or other
official having custody of entity records in the state or
country under whose laws the foreign entity is formed or is
governed stating that it the foreign entity has been dissolved
or disappeared as the result of a merger terminated.
"§10A-1-7.13.
"(a) If the Secretary of State determines that one
or more grounds exist under Section 10A-1-7.12 for revocation
of a registration, he or she the Secretary of State shall
serve the foreign entity with written notice of his or her the
determination of the Secretary of State by serving its the
foreign entity's registered agent, which service may be by
registered mail, or, if the foreign entity has no registered
agent or its registered agent cannot with reasonable diligence
be served, by serving the foreign entity by any method
permitted under Sections 10A-1-5.35 and 10A-1-5.36.
"(b) If the foreign entity does not correct each
ground for revocation or demonstrate to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Secretary of State that each ground
determined by the Secretary of State does not exist within 60
days after service of the notice is perfected under subsection
(a), the Secretary of State may revoke the foreign entity's
registration by signing a certificate of revocation that
recites the ground or grounds for revocation and its effective
date. The Secretary of State shall file the original of the
certificate and serve a copy on the foreign entity by serving
its registered agent, which service may be by registered mail,
or, if the foreign entity has no registered agent or its
registered agent cannot with reasonable diligence be served,
by serving the foreign entity by any method permitted under
Sections 10A-1-5.35 and 10A-1-5.36.
"(c) The authority of a foreign entity to transact
business in this state ceases on the date shown on the
certificate revoking its certificate of authority
registration.
"(d) Revocation of a foreign entity's registration
does not terminate the authority of the registered agent of
the foreign entity. Service of process in any action, suit, or
proceeding stating a cause of action arising in this state
during the time the foreign entity was authorized to transact
business in this state may be made on the foreign entity whose
registration has been suspended by service on the registered
agent or by serving the entity by any method permitted under
Sections 10A-1-5.35 and 10A-1-5.36.
"§10A-1-7.14.
"(a) A foreign entity may appeal the Secretary of
State's revocation of its registration to the Circuit Court of
Montgomery County within 30 days after service of the
certificate of revocation is perfected under Section
10A-1-7.13. The foreign entity appeals by petitioning the
court to set aside the revocation and attaching to the
petition copies of the Secretary of State's acknowledgment of
its application for registration, if any, or statement of
foreign limited liability partnership, as applicable and the
Secretary of State's certificate of revocation.
"(b) The court may summarily order the Secretary of
State to reinstate the certificate of authority registration,
may order a trial de novo, or may take any other action the
court considers appropriate.
"(c) The court's final decision may be appealed as
in other civil proceedings.
"§10A-1-7.22.
"(a) The failure of a foreign filing entity to
register to transact business in this state or to appoint and
maintain a registered agent in this state shall not impair the
validity of any contract or act of the foreign entity and
shall not prevent the foreign entity from defending any action
or proceeding in any court of this state, but the foreign
entity shall not maintain any action or proceeding in any
court of this state until it has delivered to the Secretary of
State for filing an application for registration or a
statement of foreign limited liability partnership, as
applicable, in accordance with Section 10A-1-7.04. A foreign
filing entity, by transacting business in this state without
filing an application for registration or a statement of
foreign limited liability partnership, as applicable, appoints
the Secretary of State as its agent for service of process
with respect to causes of action arising out of the
transaction of business or activities in this state. The
liability of the owners, members, and managerial officials of
a foreign filing entity is governed by the laws of the
jurisdiction under whose laws it was formed or under which it
is governed, and any limitations on that liability are not
waived solely by reason of having transacted business in this
state without filing an application for registration or a
statement of foreign limited liability partnership, as
applicable.
"(b) The Attorney General may bring an action to
restrain a foreign entity from transacting business in this
state in violation of this title.
"§10A-1-7.23.
"The Secretary of State may collect from a foreign
filing entity a late filing fee equal to the application for
registration fee for the or the statement of foreign limited
liability partnership fee, as applicable, for the foreign
filing entity for each year of delinquency if the foreign
filing entity has transacted business in this state for more
than 90 days. The Secretary of State may condition the
effectiveness of a registration on the payment of the late
filing fee.
"§10A-1-7.24.
"This article does not excuse a foreign filing
entity from complying with duties imposed under other law,
including other chapters of this title, relating to filing or
registration registering requirements.
"§10A-1-7.31.
"A foreign entity may not conduct in this state a
business, or activity, not for profit activity, or any other
activity, whether or not for profit, that is not permitted by
this title to be transacted by the domestic entity to which it
most closely corresponds, unless other law of this state
authorizes the entity to conduct the business, or activity,
not for profit activity or any other activity, whether or not
for profit.
"§10A-1-7.32.
"A foreign nonfiling entity or a foreign filing
entity registered entity with a registration under this
article enjoys the same but no greater rights and privileges
as the domestic entity to which it most closely corresponds.
"§10A-1-7.34.
"A vote cast or consent provided by a foreign filing
entity with respect to its ownership or membership interest in
a domestic entity of which the foreign filing entity is a
lawful owner or member, and the foreign filing entity's
participation in the management and control of the business
and affairs of the domestic entity to the extent of the
participation of other owners or members, are not invalidated
if the foreign filing entity does not register to transact
business in this state, subject to all law governing a
domestic entity, including the antitrust law of this state.
"§10A-1-7.36.
"Foreign entities that have complied with the
constitution and laws of this state as to doing transacting
business herein in this state shall have the same right of
eminent domain and the same remedies for enforcing the rights
as domestic entities of like kind and character possess.
"§10A-1-7.37.
"Any foreign entity which has complied with the
constitution and laws of this state for doing transacting
business herein in this state and which is engaged in
constructing or operating a streetcar, electric light,
telegraph, telephone or power lines, pipelines, or works in an
adjoining state may extend its lines, tracks, ways, pipelines,
or works into this state and connect with other lines,
pipelines, ways or works of similar or like character and, for
that purpose, may have and exercise the same rights,
privileges, immunities and remedies as to right of eminent
domain and condemnation proceedings as are had and exercised
by domestic entities engaged in like or similar business.
"§10A-1-8.01.
"(a) A conversion of an entity may be accomplished
as provided in this section:
"(1) CORPORATIONS.
"a. The terms and conditions of a conversion of a
corporation other than a nonprofit corporation must be
approved by all of the corporation's shareholders except or as
otherwise provided in the corporation's governing documents;
but in no case may the vote required for shareholder approval
be set at less than a majority of the votes entitled to be
cast by each voting group entitled by law to vote separately
on the conversion. If the governing documents provide for
approval of a conversion by less than all of a corporation's
shareholders, approval of the conversion shall constitute
corporate action subject to dissenter's rights pursuant to
Article 13 of Chapter 2 of the Alabama Business Corporation
Law. No conversion of a corporation to a general or limited
partnership may be effected without the consent in writing of
each shareholder who will have personal liability with respect
to the converted entity, notwithstanding any provision in the
governing documents of the converting corporation providing
for less than unanimous shareholder approval for the
conversion.
"b. The terms and conditions of a conversion of a
nonprofit corporation must be approved by all the
corporation's members entitled to vote thereon, if it is a
nonprofit corporation with members with voting rights, except
or as otherwise provided in the corporation's governing
documents; but in no case may the governing documents provide
for approval by less than a majority of the members entitled
to vote thereon. If the converting nonprofit corporation has
no members, or no members entitled to vote thereon, the terms
and conditions of the conversion must be approved by a
unanimous vote of the board of directors of the converting
nonprofit corporation, except or as otherwise provided in the
governing documents; but in no case may the governing
documents provide for approval by less than a majority of the
board of directors.
"(2) LIMITED PARTNERSHIPS. The terms and conditions
of a conversion of a limited partnership must be approved by
all of the partners or as otherwise provided in the
partnership agreement. No conversion of a limited partnership
to a general partnership may be effected without the consent
in writing of each limited partner who will have personal
liability with respect to the converted entity,
notwithstanding any provision in the limited partnership
agreement of the converting limited partnership providing for
approval of the conversion by less than all partners.
"(3) LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANIES. The terms and
conditions of a conversion of a limited liability company must
be approved by all of the limited liability company's members
or as otherwise provided in the limited liability company's
governing documents. No conversion of a limited liability
company to a general or limited partnership may be effected
without the consent in writing of each member who will have
personal liability with respect to the converted entity,
notwithstanding any provision in the governing documents of
the converting limited liability company providing for less
than unanimous member approval for the conversion.
"(4) GENERAL PARTNERSHIPS, INCLUDING REGISTERED
LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIPS. The terms and conditions of a
conversion of a general partnership must be approved by all of
the partners or as otherwise provided in the partnership
agreement. No conversion of a registered limited liability
partnership to a general or limited partnership may be
effected without the consent in writing of each partner who
will have personal liability with respect to the converted
entity, notwithstanding any provision in the partnership
agreement of the converting registered limited liability
partnership providing for less than unanimous partner approval
for the conversion.
"(5) REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUST. The terms and
conditions of a conversion of a real estate investment trust
must be approved by all of the trust's shareholders except or
as otherwise provided in the trust's declaration of trust; but
in no case may the vote required for shareholder approval be
set at less than a majority of all the votes entitled to be
cast. No conversion of a real estate investment trust to a
general or limited partnership may be effected without the
consent in writing of each shareholder who will have personal
liability with respect to the converted entity,
notwithstanding any provision in the declaration of trust of
the converting real estate investment trust providing for less
than unanimous shareholder approval for the conversion.
"(6) OTHER ENTITY. The terms and conditions of a
conversion of any entity not specified above must be approved
by all owners of the converting entity. No conversion of any
entity shall be effected without the consent in writing of any
owner of the converting entity who has limited liability and
who shall become an owner without limited liability protection
of the converted entity.
"(7) ENTITY WITHOUT OWNERS. If the converting entity
does not have owners, the terms and conditions of the
conversion must be unanimously approved by the governing
authority of the converting entity.
"(b) After the conversion is approved pursuant to
subsection (a), the following documentation and filing
requirements apply:
"(1) If the conversion is to a corporation, limited
liability company, limited partnership, real estate investment
trust, or other entity required to file a certificate of
formation, the statement of conversion, when filed in
accordance with Section 10A-1-4.02(c)(1), shall be deemed to:
"a. constitute a certificate of formation or amended
and restated certificate of formation, as the case may be, for
the converted entity; and
"b. shall satisfy the requirements of Section
10A-1-4.02(a).
"(2) In addition to any information or statements
otherwise required by law to be included in a certificate of
formation for a filing entity, a statement of conversion shall
include the following:
"a. The name and type of entity of the converted
entity and the jurisdiction of its governing statute and its
unique identifying number or other designation as assigned by
the Secretary of State, if any.
"b. The former name of the converting entity.
"c. A statement that the converting entity has been
converted into the converted entity.
"d. The public office where the certificate of
formation, if any, of the converting entity is filed and the
date of the filing thereof.
"e. If the converted entity is one in which one or
more owners lack limited liability protection, a statement
that each owner of the converting entity who is to become an
owner without limited liability protection of the resulting
converted entity has consented in writing to the conversion as
required by this section.
"f. A statement that the conversion was approved
pursuant to this section and, if either the converting entity
or the converted entity is a foreign entity, that the
conversion was approved as required by the governing statute
of such foreign entity.
"(3) After the conversion has become effective in
accordance with subsection (c), then, as provided in Section
10A-1-4.02(c)(4), all filing instruments with respect to the
converted entity that would otherwise be required by this
title to be delivered to the judge of probate for filing shall
instead be delivered to the Secretary of State for filing.
"(c) A conversion takes effect as follows:
"(1) Upon the filing of the statement of conversion
in accordance with Section 10A-1-4.02(c)(1), except as
otherwise provided in subdivision (2).
"(2) Upon any delayed effective date if, but only
if, each of the following requirements is satisfied:
"a. A delayed effective date is specified in the
statement of conversion; and
"b. If either the converted entity or the converting
entity is a foreign entity, then any filing required under the
governing statute of such foreign entity to effectuate the
conversion is filed before the effective date specified in the
statement of conversion.
"(3) If a delayed effective date is specified, and
the conditions of subdivision (2) are met, the conversion is
effective at the close of business, unless a different hour is
specified, on that date.
"(d) Conversion has the following effects:
"(1)a. Any other entity that has been converted
pursuant to this article is for all purposes the same entity
that existed before the conversion and the conversion shall
constitute a continuation of the existence of the converting
entity in the form of the converted entity. The conversion
shall not be deemed to constitute a dissolution or termination
of the converting entity.
"b. If the Secretary of State has assigned a unique
identifying number or other designation to the converting
entity, that number or designation shall continue to be
assigned to the converted entity.
"(2)a. All property, real, personal, and mixed owned
by the converting entity; all rights, immunities, and
franchises of the converting entity, of a public as well as a
private nature; and all debts or obligations due the
converting entity, shall remain owned and held by, vested in,
and due to, the converted entity, shall not be deemed to have
been transferred to the converted entity as a consequence of
the conversion, and shall not revert or be in any way impaired
by reason of the conversion.
"b. A certified copy of the statement of conversion
may be filed in the office of the judge of probate in any
county in which the converting entity owned real property, to
be recorded without payment and without collection by the
judge of probate of any deed or other transfer tax or fee. The
judge of probate shall, however, be entitled to collect the
filing fees prescribed by Section 12-19-90. Any filing shall
evidence chain of title, but lack of filing shall not affect
the converted entity's title to the real property.
"(3) All debts, obligations, and other liabilities
of the converting entity shall continue as the debts,
obligations, and liabilities of the converted entity and the
converted entity shall continue to be responsible and liable
for all the liabilities and obligations of the converting
entity. Neither the rights of creditors, nor any liens upon
the property of the converting entity, shall be impaired by
the conversion, and an owner of the converted entity shall
continue to be liable for all obligations of the converting
entity for which the owner was personally liable before the
conversion.
"(4) Any claim existing or any action or proceeding
of any kind pending by or against the converting entity shall
be prosecuted or continued as if the conversion had not
occurred.
"(5) a. An owner with limited liability protection
remains liable, if at all, for an obligation incurred by the
converting entity before the conversion takes effect only to
the extent, if any, the owner would have been liable if the
conversion had not occurred.
"b. An owner with limited liability protection who
becomes an owner without limited liability protection is
liable for an obligation of the converted entity incurred
after conversion to the extent provided for by the laws
applicable to the converted entity.
"(6) An owner without limited liability protection
who as a result of a conversion becomes an owner of a
converted entity with limited liability protection remains
liable for an obligation incurred by the converting entity
before the conversion takes effect only to the extent, if any,
the owner would have been liable if the conversion had not
occurred.
"§10A-1-8.02.
"(a) Pursuant to an approved plan of merger, a
corporation, limited partnership, limited liability company,
general partnership, real estate investment trust, or any
other entity may merge with any other entity or entities,
whether the other entity or entities are the same or another
form of entity, as provided in this section.
"(b) A plan of merger shall include the following:
"(1) The name of each entity that is a party to the
merger.
"(2) The name of the surviving entity into which the
other entity or entities will merge.
"(3) The form of the surviving entity and the status
in the surviving entity of each owner of an entity that is a
party to the merger.
"(4) The terms and conditions of the merger.
"(5) The manner and basis of converting the
interests of each party to the merger into interests or
obligations of the surviving entity, or into money or other
property in whole or part.
"(c) A plan of merger may set forth:
"(1) Amendments to the certificate of formation of
the surviving entity.
"(2) Other provisions relating to the merger.
"(d) A plan of merger shall be approved as follows:
"(1) CORPORATIONS.
a. In the case of a corporation, other than a
nonprofit corporation, that is a party to a merger, the plan
of merger must be approved in accordance with the procedures
and by the shareholder vote required by Section 10A-2-11.03 or
Section 10A-2-11.04. If the governing documents of the
corporation provide for approval of a merger by less than all
of the corporation's shareholders, approval of the merger
shall constitute corporate action subject to dissenter's
rights pursuant to Article 13 of Chapter 2. No merger of a
corporation into a general or limited partnership may be
effected without the consent in writing of each shareholder
who will have personal liability with respect to the resulting
or surviving entity, notwithstanding any provision in the
governing documents of the corporation that is a party to the
merger providing for less than unanimous shareholder approval
for the conversion.
"b. In the case of a nonprofit corporation, the plan
of merger must be approved by all the corporation's members
entitled to vote thereon, if it is a nonprofit corporation
with members with voting rights, except or as otherwise
provided in the corporation's governing documents; but in no
case may the governing documents provide for approval by less
than a majority of the members entitled to vote thereon. If
the nonprofit corporation has no members, or no members
entitled to vote thereon, the plan of merger must be approved
by a unanimous vote of the board of directors of the nonprofit
corporation, except as otherwise provided in the governing
documents; but in no case may the governing documents provide
for approval by less than a majority of the board of
directors.
"(2) LIMITED PARTNERSHIPS. In the case of a limited
partnership that is a party to the merger, the plan of merger
must be approved in writing by all of the partners or as
otherwise provided in the partnership agreement. No merger of
a limited partnership with a general partnership in which the
general partnership is the surviving or resulting entity may
be effected without the consent in writing of each limited
partner who will have personal liability with respect to the
surviving or resulting entity, notwithstanding any provision
in the limited partnership agreement of the merging limited
partnership providing for approval of the merger by less than
all partners.
"(3) LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANIES. In the case of a
limited liability company that is a party to the merger, the
plan of merger must be approved in writing by all of the
limited liability company's members or as otherwise provided
in the limited liability company's governing documents. No
merger of a limited liability company with a general or
limited partnership that is the surviving or resulting entity
may be effected without the consent in writing of each member
who will have personal liability with respect to the surviving
or resulting entity, notwithstanding any provision in the
governing documents of the merging limited liability company
providing for less than unanimous shareholder approval for a
merger.
"(4) GENERAL PARTNERSHIPS, INCLUDING REGISTERED
LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIPS. In the case of a general
partnership that is a party to the merger, the plan of merger
must be approved in writing by all of the partners or as
otherwise provided in the partnership agreement. No merger of
a registered limited liability partnership into a general or
limited partnership may be effected without the consent in
writing of each partner who will have personal liability with
respect to the surviving or resulting entity, notwithstanding
any provision in the partnership agreement of the registered
limited liability partnership providing for less than
unanimous partner approval for a merger.
"(5) REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUST. In the case of a
real estate investment trust that is a party to the merger,
the plan of merger must be approved in writing by all of the
trust's shareholders except or as otherwise provided in the
trust's declaration of trust, but in no case may the vote
required for shareholder approval be set at less than a
majority of all the votes entitled to be cast. No merger of a
real estate investment trust with a general or limited
partnership that is to be the surviving or resulting entity
may be effected without the consent in writing of each
shareholder who will have personal liability with respect to
the surviving or resulting business entity.
"(6) OTHER ENTITY. In the case of an entity other
than a corporation, limited partnership, limited liability
company, general partnership, or real estate investment trust
that is a party to the merger, by approval in writing of all
owners of the entity. No merger of any entity shall be
effected without the consent in writing of any owner who has
limited liability as an owner of an entity party to the
merger, and who will have personal liability with respect to
the surviving or resulting entity.
"(e) After a plan of merger is approved and before
the merger takes effect, the plan may be amended or abandoned
as provided in the plan, or if the plan does not provide for
amendment or abandonment, in the same manner as required for
the approval of the plan of merger originally.
"(f) The merger takes effect as follows:
"(1) Upon the filing of the statement of merger in
accordance with Section 10A-1-4.02(c)(1), except as otherwise
provided in subdivision (2).
"(2) Upon any delayed effective date if, but only
if, each of the following requirements is satisfied:
"a. A delayed effective date is specified in the
statement of merger.
"b. If either the converted entity or the merging
entity is a foreign entity, then any filing required under the
governing statute of such foreign entity to effectuate the
merger is filed before the effective date specified in the
statement of merger.
"(3) If a delayed effective date is specified and
the conditions of subdivision (2) are met, the merger is
effective at the close of business, unless a different hour is
specified, on that date in accordance with and subject to
Section 10A-1-4.12.
"(g) The certificate of merger shall include the
following:
"(1) The names of each of the entities which are to
merge and their respective unique identifying numbers or other
designations as assigned by the Secretary of State, if any.
"(2) The public office where the certificate of
formation, if any, of each of the parties to the merger is
filed.
"(3) A statement that a plan of merger has been
approved by each of the entities which are to merge in the
manner set forth in this article.
"(4) If the surviving or resulting entity is one in
which one or more owners lack limited liability protection, a
statement that each owner of an entity party to the merger who
is to be an owner of the surviving or resulting entity without
limited liability protection has consented in writing to the
merger as required by this article.
"(5) The name of the surviving or resulting entity.
"(6) The date, or date and time, on which the merger
becomes effective if it is not to be effective upon the filing
of the certificate of merger.
"(7) That the plan of merger is on file at a place
of business of the surviving or resulting entity, and shall
state the address thereof.
"(8) That a copy of the plan of merger will be
furnished by the surviving or resulting entity, on request and
without cost, to any owner of any entity which is a party to
the merger.
"(9) If the plan of merger includes any amendments
to the certificate of formation of the surviving or resulting
entity, a statement of all such amendments.
"(h) The certificate of merger shall be filed with
the Secretary of State in accordance with Section 10A-1-4.02.
"(i) The merger shall have the following effects:
"(1) Every other entity party to the merger merges
into the surviving entity which shall be deemed to be the
resulting entity of the merger and the separate existence of
every entity, other than the surviving or resulting entity,
ceases.
"(2) All property, real, personal, and mixed owned
by each of the merged entities; all rights, immunities, and
franchises of the merged entities, of a public as well as a
private nature; and all debts and obligations due the merged
entities, are taken and deemed to be transferred and vested in
the surviving or resulting entity without the necessity of any
deed or other instrument of conveyance to the surviving or
resulting entity and without payment and without collection by
any filing officer of any deed or other transfer tax or fee. A
certified copy of the certificate of merger may be filed in
the real estate records in the office of the judge of probate
in any county in which any entity a party to the merger owned
real property, to be recorded without payment and without
collection by the judge of probate of any deed or other
transfer tax or fee. The judge of probate shall, however, be
entitled to collect the filing fees prescribed by Section
12-19-90. Any filing shall evidence chain of title, but lack
of filing does not affect the resulting entity's title to any
real property.
"(3) The surviving or resulting entity shall be
responsible and liable for all the liabilities and obligations
of the entities that are parties to the merger; however,
neither the rights of creditors nor any liens upon the
property of the entities that are parties to the merger shall
be impaired by the merger.
"(4) Any claim existing or action or proceeding, of
any kind, pending by or against an entity that is a party to
the merger may be prosecuted or continued as if the merger had
not occurred, or the surviving or resulting entity may be
substituted as a party to the action or proceeding.
"(5) Service of process in an action or proceeding
against a surviving or resulting foreign entity to enforce an
obligation of a domestic entity that is a party to a merger
may be made by registered mail addressed to the surviving
entity at the address set forth in the certificate of merger
or by any method provided by the Alabama Rules of Civil
Procedure. Any notice or demand required or permitted by law
to be served on a domestic entity may be served on the
surviving or resulting foreign entity by registered mail
addressed to the surviving entity at the address set forth in
the certificate of merger or in any other manner similar to
the procedure provided by the Alabama Rules of Civil Procedure
for the service of process.
"(6) a. An owner of an entity with limited liability
protection remains liable, if at all, for an obligation
incurred prior to the merger by an entity that ceases to exist
as a result of the merger only to the extent, if any, that the
owner would have been liable under the laws applicable to
owners of the form of entity that ceased to exist if the
merger had not occurred.
"b. An owner with limited liability protection who,
as a result of the merger, becomes an owner without limited
liability protection of the surviving or resulting entity is
liable for an obligation of the surviving or resulting entity
incurred after merger to the extent provided for by the laws
applicable to the surviving or resulting entity.
"(7) An owner without limited liability protection
of an entity that ceases to exist as a result of a merger and
who as a result of the merger becomes an owner of a surviving
or resulting entity with limited liability protection remains
liable for an obligation of the entity that ceases to exist
incurred before the merger takes effect only to the extent, if
any, that the owner would have been liable if the merger had
not occurred.
"§10A-1-8.03.
"This article is not exclusive but is cumulative to
other laws and provisions of this title relating to mergers
and conversion. Entities, including corporations, limited
partnerships, limited liability companies, general
partnerships, and real estate investment trusts, may be
converted or merged in any other manner provided by law,
including other provisions of this title. This article does
not preclude any entity from being converted or merged under
law other than this chapter.
Section 4. Section 10A-1-9.01 of the Code of Alabama
1975 is amended and renumbered to read as follows:
"§10A-1-9.01. §10-1-9.02.
"In this article, the following terms have the
following meanings:
"(1) CLAIM. A right to payment, damages, or
property, whether liquidated or unliquidated, accrued or
contingent, matured or unmatured.
"(2) WINDING UP. The process of winding up the
business and affairs of a domestic entity as a result of the
occurrence of an event requiring winding up."
Section 5. Section 10A-1-9.01 is added to the Code
of Alabama 1975 as follows:
§10A-1-9.01.
This article does not apply to limited liability
companies, general partnerships, and limited partnerships.
Section 6. Sections 10A-1-9.21, 10A-1-9.22,
10A-5A-1.02, 10A-5A-1.06, 10A-9A-1.07, and 10A-17-1.02 of the
Code of Alabama 1975, are amended to read as follows:
"§10A-1-9.21.
"(a) A dissolved domestic entity, except as
otherwise provided in subsection (e), may dispose of the known
claims against it by following the procedure described in this
section subsection (b) at any time after the effective date of
the dissolution of that dissolved domestic entity.
"(b) The A dissolved domestic entity shall notify
its known claimants in writing may give notice of the
dissolution at any time after its effective date. The written
in a writing to the holder of any know claim. The notice must:
"(1) Identify the dissolved domestic entity;
"(1) (2) Describe the information that must required
to be included in a claim;
"(2) (3) Provide a mailing address where a to which
the claim may is to be sent;
"(3) (4) State the deadline, which may not be fewer
than 120 days from the effective date of the written notice,
by which the terminated dissolved domestic entity must receive
the claim; and
"(4) (5) State that if not sooner barred, the claim
will be barred if not received by the deadline.
"(c) Unless sooner barred by any other statute
limiting actions, a A claim against a dissolved domestic
entity is barred:
"(1) If a claimant who was given written notice
under subsection (b) does not deliver the claim to the
dissolved domestic entity by the deadline;
"(2) If a claimant whose claim was rejected by the
dissolved domestic entity does not commence a proceeding to
enforce the claim within 90 days from the effective date of
the rejection notice.
"(d) For purposes of this section, "known claim" or
"claim" includes unliquidated claims but does not include a
contingent liability that has not matured so that there is no
immediate right to bring suit, or a claim based on an event
occurring after the effective date of dissolution.
"(e) The procedures of Nothing in this section do
not apply to the disposition of claims against a general or
limited partnership shall be deemed to extend any otherwise
applicable statute of limitations.
"§10A-1-9.22.
"(a) A dissolved domestic entity, except as
otherwise provided in subsection (f), may also publish notice
of its dissolution and request that persons with claims
against the dissolved domestic entity present them in
accordance with the notice.
"(b) The notice authorized by subsection (a) must:
"(1) Be published at least one time in a newspaper
of general circulation in the county where in which the
dissolved domestic entity's principal office is located, or,
if it has none in this state, its in the county in which the
dissolved domestic entity's registered office, is or was last
located;
"(2) Describe the information that must be included
in a claim and provide a mailing address where to which the
claim may is to be sent; and
"(3) State that if not sooner barred, a claim
against the dissolved domestic entity will be barred unless a
proceeding to enforce the claim is commenced within two years
after the publication of the notice.
"(c) If the a dissolved domestic entity publishes a
newspaper notice in accordance with subsection (b), unless
sooner barred by any other statute limiting actions, the claim
of each of the following claimants is barred unless the
claimant commences a proceeding to enforce the claim against
the dissolved domestic entity within two years after the
publication date of the newspaper notice:
"(1) A claimant who did not receive written was not
given notice under Section 10A-1-9.21;
"(2) A claimant whose claim was timely sent to the
dissolved domestic entity but not acted on; by the dissolved
domestic entity; and
"(3) A claimant whose claim is contingent or based
on an event occurring after the effective date of dissolution
at the effective date of the dissolution of the dissolved
domestic entity, or is based on an event occurring after the
effective date of the dissolution of the dissolved domestic
entity.
"(d) A claim may be enforced under this section that
is not barred under this section, any other statute limiting
actions, or Section 10A-1-9.21 may be enforced:
"(1) Against the a dissolved domestic entity, to the
extent of its undistributed assets; or and
"(2) If the assets have been distributed in
liquidation, against an owner of the dissolved domestic entity
to the extent of his or her pro rata share of the claim or the
entity assets distributed to him or her in liquidation,
whichever is less, but an owner's total liability for all
claims under this section may not exceed the total amount of
assets distributed to him or her in liquidation Except as
provided in subsection (h), if the assets of a dissolved
domestic entity have been distributed after dissolution,
against the person or persons owning ownership interests in
the dissolved domestic entity to the extent of that person's
proportionate share of the claim or of the assets of the
dissolved domestic entity distributed to that person after
dissolution, whichever is less, but a person's total liability
for all claims under subsection (d) may not exceed the total
amount of assets distributed to that person after dissolution
of the dissolved domestic entity.
"(e) A dissolved domestic entity that published a
notice under this section may file an application with the
circuit court in the county in which the dissolved domestic
entity's principal place of business is located and if the
dissolved domestic entity does not have a principal place of
business within this state, in the county in which the
dissolved domestic entity's most recent registered office is
located, for a determination of the amount and form of
security to be provided for payment of claims that are
contingent or have not been made known to the dissolved
domestic entity or that are based on an event occurring after
the effective date of the dissolution of the dissolved
domestic entity but that, based on the facts known to the
dissolved domestic entity, are reasonably estimated to arise
after the effective date of the dissolution of the dissolved
domestic entity. Provision need not be made for any claim that
is or is reasonably anticipated to be barred under subsection
(c).
"(f) Within ten days after the filing of the
application provided for in subsection (e), notice of the
proceeding shall be given by the dissolved domestic entity to
each potential claimant as described in subsection (e).
"(g) The circuit court under subsection (e) may
appoint a guardian ad litem to represent all claimants whose
identities are unknown in any proceeding brought under this
section. The reasonable fees and expenses of the guardian,
including all reasonable expert witness fees, shall be paid by
the dissolved domestic entity.
"(h) Provision by the dissolved domestic entity for
security in the amount and the form ordered by the circuit
court under subsection (e) shall satisfy the dissolved
domestic entity's obligation with respect to claims that are
contingent, have not been made known to the dissolved domestic
entity, or are based on an event occurring after the effective
date of the dissolution of the dissolved domestic entity, and
those claims may not be enforced against a person owning an
ownership interest to whom assets have been distributed by the
dissolved domestic entity after the effective date of the
dissolution of the dissolved domestic entity.
"(e) (i) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
extend any otherwise applicable statute of limitations.
"(f) The procedures of this section do not apply to
the disposition of claims against a general or limited
partnership.
(j) If a claim has been satisfied, disposed of, or
barred under Section 10A-1-9.21, this section, or other law,
the person or persons designated to wind up the affairs of a
dissolved domestic entity, and the owners of the ownership
interests receiving assets from the dissolved domestic entity,
shall not be liable for that claim.
"§10A-5A-1.02.
"Notwithstanding Section 10A-1-1.03, as used in this
chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
terms mean:
"(a) "Certificate of formation," with respect to a
limited liability company, means the certificate provided for
by Section 10A-5A-2.01, and the certificate as amended or
restated.
"(b) "Constituent limited liability company" means a
constituent organization that is a limited liability company.
"(c) "Constituent organization" means an
organization that is party to a merger under Article 10.
"(d) "Converted organization" means the organization
into which a converting organization converts pursuant to
Article 10.
"(e) "Converting limited liability company" means a
converting organization that is a limited liability company.
"(f) "Converting organization" means an organization
that converts into another organization pursuant to Article
10.
"(g) "Disqualified person" means any person who is
not a qualified person.
"(h) "Distribution" except as otherwise provided in
Section 10A-5A-4.06(e), means a transfer of money or other
property from a limited liability company, or series thereof,
to another person on account of a transferable interest.
"(i) "Foreign limited liability company" means a
limited liability company governed by the laws of a
jurisdiction other than this state which would be a limited
liability company if governed by the laws of this state.
"(i) (j) "Governing statute" means the statute that
governs an organization's internal affairs.
"(j) (k) "Limited liability company," except in the
phrase "foreign limited liability company," means an entity
formed or existing under this chapter.
"(k) (l) "Limited liability company agreement" means
any agreement (whether referred to as a limited liability
company agreement, operating agreement or otherwise), written,
oral or implied, of the member or members as to the activities
and affairs of a limited liability company or series thereof.
The limited liability company agreement of a limited liability
company having only one member shall not be unenforceable by
reason of there being only one person who is a party to the
limited liability company agreement. The limited liability
company agreement includes any amendments to the limited
liability company agreement.
"(l) (m) "Member" means a person admitted under
Section 10A-5A-4.01 and not dissociated under Section
10A-5A-6.02.
"(m) (n) "Organization" means a general partnership,
including a limited liability partnership; limited
partnership, including a limited liability limited
partnership; limited liability company; business trust;
corporation; nonprofit corporation; professional corporation;
or any other person having a governing statute. The term
includes domestic and foreign organizations whether or not
organized for profit.
"(n) (o) "Organizational documents" means:
"(1) for a general partnership or foreign general
partnership, its partnership agreement and if applicable, its
registration as a limited liability partnership or a foreign
limited liability partnership;
"(2) for a limited partnership or foreign limited
partnership, its certificate of formation and partnership
agreement, or comparable writings as provided in its governing
statute;
"(3) for a limited liability company or foreign
limited liability company, its certificate of formation and
limited liability company agreement, or comparable writings as
provided in its governing statute;
"(4) for a business or statutory trust or foreign
business or statutory trust its agreement of trust and
declaration of trust, or comparable writings as provided in
its governing statute;
"(5) for a corporation for profit or foreign
corporation for profit, its certificate of formation, bylaws,
and other agreements among its shareholders that are
authorized by its governing statute, or comparable writings as
provided in its governing statute;
"(6) for a nonprofit corporation or foreign
nonprofit corporation, its certificate of formation, bylaws,
and other agreements that are authorized by its governing
statute, or comparable writings as provided in its governing
statute;
"(7) for a professional corporation or foreign
professional corporation, its certificate of formation,
bylaws, and other agreements among its shareholders that are
authorized by its governing statute, or comparable writings as
provided in its governing statute; and
"(8) for any other organization, the basic writings
that create the organization and determine its internal
governance and the relations among the persons that own it,
have an interest in it, or are members of it.
"(o) (p) "Qualified person," with respect to a
limited liability company rendering professional services in
this state, means a person authorized by this state or a
regulatory authority of this state to own a transferrable
transferable interest in that limited liability company.
"(p) (q) "Surviving organization" means an
organization into which one or more other organizations are
merged under Article 10, whether the organization pre-existed
the merger or was created pursuant to the merger.
"(q) (r) "Transfer" means an assignment, conveyance,
deed, bill of sale, lease, mortgage, security interest,
encumbrance, gift, or transfer by operation of law.
"(r) (s) "Transferee" means a person to which all or
part of a transferable interest has been transferred, whether
or not the transferor is a member.
"(s) (t) "Transferrable Transferable interest" means
a member's right to receive distributions from a limited
liability company or a series thereof.
"§10A-5A-1.06.
"(a) It is the policy of this chapter and this state
to give maximum effect to the principles of freedom of
contract and to the enforceability of limited liability
company agreements.
"(b) Unless displaced by particular provisions of
this chapter, the principles of law and equity supplement this
chapter.
"(c) The rule that statutes in derogation of the
common law are to be strictly construed shall have no
application to this chapter.
"(d) The use of any gender shall be applicable to
all genders. The captions contained in this chapter are for
purposes of convenience only and shall not control or affect
the construction of this chapter.
"(e) Sections 7-9A-406 and 7-9A-408 of the Uniform
Commercial Code, and all successor statutes thereto, do not
apply to any interest in a limited liability company,
including all rights, powers, and interests arising under a
limited liability company agreement or this chapter. This
provision prevails over Sections 7-9A-406 and 7-9A-408 of the
Uniform Commercial Code, and all successor statutes thereto,
and is expressly intended to permit the enforcement of the
provisions of a limited liability company agreement that would
otherwise be ineffective under Sections 7-9A-406 and 7-9A-408
of the Uniform Commercial Code, and all successor statutes
thereto.
"(f) Division E of Article 3 of Chapter 1 of this
title shall have no application to this chapter.
"(g) Sections 10A-1-1.03 (73), (81), (88), and (91)
The terms president, vice president, secretary, and treasurer
as defined in Chapter 1 shall have no application to this
chapter.
"(h) Section 10A-1-2.13(c) shall have no application
to this chapter.
"§10A-9A-1.07.
"(a) It is the policy of this chapter and this state
to give maximum effect to the principles of freedom of
contract and to the enforceability of partnership agreements.
"(b) Unless displaced by particular provisions of
this chapter, the principles of law and equity supplement this
chapter.
"(c) If an obligation to pay interest arises under
this chapter and the rate is not specified, the rate is the
applicable federal rate as determined from time to time by the
United States Treasury pursuant to 26 U.S.C. §1274(d) or any
successor law.
"(d) The rule that statutes in derogation of the
common law are to be strictly construed shall have no
application to this chapter.
"(e) The use of any gender shall be applicable to
all genders. The captions contained in this chapter are for
purposes of convenience only and shall not control or affect
the construction of this chapter.
"(f) Sections 7-9A-406 and 7-9A-408 of the Uniform
Commercial Code, and all successor statutes thereto, do not
apply to any interest in a limited partnership, including all
rights, powers, and interests arising under a partnership
agreement or this chapter. This provision prevails over
Sections 7-9A-406 and 7-9A-408 of the Uniform Commercial Code,
and all successor statutes thereto, and is expressly intended
to permit the enforcement of the provisions of a partnership
agreement that would otherwise be ineffective under Sections
7-9A-406 and 7-9A-408 of the Uniform Commercial Code, and all
successor statutes thereto.
"(g) Division E of Article 3 of Chapter 1 shall have
no application to this chapter.
"(h) Sections 10A-1-1.03(73), (81), (88), and (91)
The terms president, vice president, secretary, and treasurer
as defined in Chapter 1 shall have no application to this
chapter.
"(i) Section 10A-1-2.13(c) shall have no application
to this chapter.
"§10A-17-1.02.
"In this chapter:
"(1) "Member" means a person who, under the rules or
practices of a nonprofit association, may participate in the
selection of persons authorized to manage the affairs of the
nonprofit association or in the development of policy of the
nonprofit association.
"(2) "Nonprofit association" means an unincorporated
organization consisting of two or more members joined by
mutual consent as an association for a stated common,
nonprofit purpose, but does not include a limited liability
company, general partnership, or limited partnership. In
addition,. However, joint tenancy, tenancy in common, or
tenancy by the entireties does not by itself establish a
nonprofit association, even if the co-owners share use of the
property for a nonprofit purpose.
"(3) "Nonprofit purpose" shall be any purpose for
which a nonprofit corporation could be organized under the
Alabama Nonprofit Corporation Act, as amended, and where no
part of income or profit is distributable to its members,
directors and officers."
Section 7. Chapter 8A, comprised of Articles 1 to 11
inclusive, is added to Title 10A of the Code of Alabama 1975
as follows:
Article 1. General Provisions.
§10A-8A-1.01. Short title. This chapter and the
provisions of Chapter 1 to the extent applicable to
partnerships, shall be known and may be cited as the Alabama
Partnership Law.
§10A-8A-1.02. Definitions.
Notwithstanding Section 10A-1-1.03, as used in this
chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
terms mean:
(1) "Business" includes every trade, occupation, and
profession for profit.
(2) "Disqualified person" means any person who is
not a qualified person.
(3) "Distribution" except as otherwise provided in
Section 10A-8A-4.09(f), means a transfer of money or other
property from a partnership to another person on account of a
transferable interest.
(4) "Foreign limited liability partnership" means a
foreign partnership whose partners have limited liability for
the debts, obligations, or other liabilities of the foreign
partnership under a provision similar to Section
10A-8A-3.06(c).
(5) "Foreign partnership" means a partnership
governed by the laws of a jurisdiction other than this state
which would be a partnership if governed by the laws of this
state. The term includes a foreign limited liability
partnership.
(6) "Limited liability partnership", except in the
phrase "foreign limited liability partnership", means a
partnership that has filed a statement of limited liability
partnership under Section 10A-8A-10.01, and does not have a
similar statement in effect in any other jurisdiction.
(7) "Not for profit activity" includes every
undertaking not for profit.
(8) "Partner" means a person that:
(A) has become a partner in a partnership under
Section 10A-8A-4.02 or was a partner in a partnership when the
partnership became subject to this chapter; and
(B) has not dissociated as a partner under Section
10A-8A-6.01.
(9) "Partnership" means an association of two or
more persons formed under Section 10A-8A-2.01, predecessor
statute, or comparable law of another jurisdiction or becomes
subject to the laws of this state pursuant to Section
10A-8A-1.06, to carry on any business or not for profit
activity, and includes, for all purposes of the laws of this
state, a limited liability partnership.
(10) "Partnership agreement" means any agreement
(whether referred to as a partnership agreement or otherwise),
written, oral or implied, of the partners as to the business
or not for profit activity of a partnership. The partnership
agreement includes any amendments to the partnership
agreement.
(11) "Partnership at will" means a partnership in
which the partners have not agreed to remain partners until
the expiration of a definite term or the completion of a
particular undertaking.
(12) "Person dissociated as a partner" means a
person dissociated as a partner of a partnership.
(13) "Qualified person," with respect to a
partnership rendering professional services in this state,
means a person authorized by this state or a regulatory
authority of this state to own a transferable interest in that
partnership.
(14) "Required information" means the information
that a partnership is required to maintain under Section
10A-8A-1.11.
(15) "Statement" means a statement of partnership
under Section 10A-8A-2.02, a statement of not for profit
partnership under Section 10A-8A-2.02, a statement of
authority under Section 10A-8A-3.03, a statement of denial
under Section 10A-8A-3.04, a statement of dissociation under
Section 10A-8A-7.04, a statement of dissolution under Section
10A-8A-8.02 or under Section 10A-8A-8.03, a certificate of
reinstatement under Section 10A-8A-8.11, a statement of
limited liability partnership under Section 10A-8A-10.01, a
statement of cancellation under Section 10A-8A-10.01, or any
other document required or permitted to be delivered to the
Secretary of State for filing under this chapter, or an
amendment or cancellation of any of the foregoing.
(16) "Transfer" means an assignment, conveyance,
deed, bill of sale, lease, mortgage, security interest,
encumbrance, gift, or transfer by operation of law.
(17) "Transferable interest" means a partner's right
to receive distributions from a partnership.
(18) "Transferee" means a person to which all or
part of a transferable interest has been transferred, whether
or not the transferor is a partner.
§10A-8A-1.03. Knowledge and notice.
(a) A person knows a fact when the person:
(1) has actual knowledge of it; or
(2) is deemed to know it under law other than this
chapter.
(b) A person has notice of a fact when the person:
(1) knows of it;
(2) receives notice of it;
(3) has reason to know the fact from all of the
facts known to the person at the time in question; or
(4) is deemed to have notice of the fact under
subsection (d).
(c) A person notifies or gives notice to another
person by taking steps reasonably required to inform the other
person in ordinary course, whether or not the other person
knows the fact.
(d) A person is deemed to have notice of a
partnership's:
(1) statement of partnership, 90 days after a
statement of partnership under Section 10A-8A-2.02 becomes
effective;
(2) statement of not for profit partnership, 90 days
after a statement of not for profit partnership under Section
10A-8A-2.02 becomes effective;
(3) statement of authority, with respect to
(i) authority not involving property and
(ii) property other than real property, 90 days
after a statement of authority under Section 10A-8A-3.03
becomes effective; and with respect to real property in
accordance with Section 10A-8A-3.03(g);
(4) statement of denial, with respect to property
other than real property, 90 days after a statement of denial
under Section 10A-8A-3.04 becomes effective;
(5) dissociation, 90 days after a statement of
dissociation under Section 10A-9A-7.04 becomes effective;
(6) dissolution, 90 days after a statement of
dissolution under Section 10A-9A-8.02 or Section 10A-9A-8.03
becomes effective;
(7) reinstatement, 90 days after a certificate of
reinstatement under Section 10A-9A-8.11 becomes effective;
(8) merger or conversion under Article 9 or under
Article 8 of Chapter 1, 90 days after the statement of merger
or conversion becomes effective;
(9) statement of limited liability partnership, 90
days after a statement of limited liability partnership under
Section 10A-8A-10.01 becomes effective; or
(10) statement of cancellation, 90 days after a
statement of cancellation under Section 10A-8A-10.01 becomes
effective.
(e) A partner's knowledge, notice, or receipt of
notice of a fact relating to the partnership is effective
immediately as knowledge of, notice to, or receipt of notice
by the partnership, except in the case of a fraud on the
partnership committed by or with the consent of that partner.
§10A-8A-1.04. Nature and purpose.
(a) A partnership is a separate legal entity. A
partnership's status for tax purposes shall not affect its
status as a separate legal entity formed under this chapter. A
partnership is the same entity regardless of whether the
partnership has a statement of limited liability partnership
under Section 10A-8A-10.01 stating that the partnership is a
limited liability partnership. A partner has no interest in
any specific property of a partnership.
(b) A partnership may carry on any lawful business
and may carry on any lawful not for profit activity if it
complies with Section 10A-8A-2.02(b).
§10A-8A-1.05. Powers; indemnification.
(a) A partnership shall possess and may exercise all
the powers and privileges granted and enumerated by Chapter 1
or by any other law or by its partnership agreement, together
with any powers incidental thereto, including those powers and
privileges necessary or convenient to the conduct, promotion,
or attainment of the business or not for profit activity of
the partnership and including the power to sue, be sued, and
defend in its own name and to maintain an action against a
partner for harm caused to the partnership by a breach of the
partnership agreement or violation of a duty to the
partnership.
(b) A partnership may indemnify and hold harmless a
partner or other person, pay in advance or reimburse expenses
incurred by a partner or other person, and purchase and
maintain insurance on behalf of a partner or other person.
§10A-8A-1.06. Governing law.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in subsections (b),
(c), and (d) of this section, the law of the jurisdiction in
which the partnership has its principal office governs the
partnership agreement and the relations among the partners and
between the partners and the partnership.
(b) The law of this state governs the (i) internal
affairs of a limited liability partnership, including the
relations among the partners and between the partners and the
partnership, (ii) the liability of a partner as a partner for
the debts, obligations, or other liabilities of a limited
liability partnership, and (iii) the authority of the partners
of a limited liability partnership.
(c) The law of the jurisdiction in which a foreign
limited liability partnership has filed its statement of
limited liability partnership or similar writing governs the
(i) internal affairs of that foreign limited liability
partnership, including the relations among the partners and
between the partners and the partnership, (ii) the liability
of a partner as a partner for the debts, obligations, or other
liabilities of a foreign limited liability partnership, and
(iii) the authority of the partners of a foreign limited
liability partnership.
(d) If (i) a partnership agreement provides for the
application of the laws of this state, and (ii) the
partnership delivers to the Secretary of State for filing a
statement of partnership in accordance with Section
10A-8A-2.02(a), a statement of not for profit partnership in
accordance with Section 10A-8A-2.02(b), or a statement of
limited liability partnership in accordance with Section
10A-8A-10.01, then the partnership agreement shall be governed
by and construed under the laws of this state.
§10A-8A-1.07. Supplemental principles of law; rate
of interest.
(a) It is the policy of this chapter and this state
to give maximum effect to the principles of freedom of
contract and to the enforceability of partnership agreements.
(b) Unless displaced by particular provisions of
this chapter, the principles of law and equity supplement this
chapter.
(c) If an obligation to pay interest arises under
this chapter and the rate is not specified, the rate is the
applicable federal rate as determined from time to time by the
United States Treasury pursuant to 26 U.S.C. §1274(d) or any
successor law.
(d) The rule that statutes in derogation of the
common law are to be strictly construed shall have no
application to this chapter.
(e) The use of any gender shall be applicable to all
genders. The captions contained in this chapter are for
purposes of convenience only and shall not control or affect
the construction of this chapter.
(f) Sections 7-9A-406 and 7-9A-408 of the Uniform
Commercial Code, and all successor statutes thereto, do not
apply to any interest in a partnership, including all rights,
powers, and interests arising under a partnership agreement or
this chapter. This provision prevails over Sections 7-9A-406
and 7-9A-408 of the Uniform Commercial Code, and all successor
statutes thereto, and is expressly intended to permit the
enforcement of the provisions of a partnership agreement that
would otherwise be ineffective under Sections 7-9A-406 and
7-9A-408 of the Uniform Commercial Code, and all successor
statutes thereto.
(g) Division E of Article 3 of Chapter 1 shall have
no application to this chapter.
(h) The terms president, vice-president, secretary,
and treasurer as defined in Chapter 1 shall have no
application to this chapter.
(i) Section 10A-1-2.13(c) shall have no application
to this chapter.
§10A-8A-1.08. Effect of partnership agreement;
nonwaivable provisions.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in subsections (b)
and (c):
(1) the partnership agreement governs relations
among the partners as partners and between the partners and
the partnership; and
(2) to the extent the partnership agreement does not
otherwise provide for a matter described in subsection (a)(1),
this chapter governs the matter.
(b) (1) To the extent that, at law or in equity, a
partner or other person has duties, including fiduciary
duties, to a partnership or to another partner or to another
person that is a party to or is otherwise bound by a
partnership agreement, the partner's or other person's duties
may be expanded or restricted or eliminated by provisions in a
written partnership agreement, but the implied contractual
covenant of good faith and fair dealing may not be eliminated.
(2) A written partnership agreement may provide for
the limitation or elimination of any and all liabilities for
breach of contract and breach of duties, including fiduciary
duties, of a partner or other person to a partnership or to
another partner or to another person that is a party to or is
otherwise bound by a partnership agreement, but a partnership
agreement may not limit or eliminate liability for any act or
omission that constitutes a bad faith violation of the implied
contractual covenant of good faith and fair dealing.
(3) A partner or other person shall not be liable to
a partnership or to another partner or to another person that
is a party to or is otherwise bound by a partnership agreement
for breach of fiduciary duty for the partner's or other
person's good faith reliance on the partnership agreement.
(4) A partnership agreement may provide that:
(A) a partner or transferee who fails to perform in
accordance with, or to comply with the terms and conditions
of, the partnership agreement shall be subject to specified
penalties or specified consequences; and
(B) at the time or upon the happening of events
specified in the partnership agreement, a partner or
transferee may be subject to specified penalties or specified
consequences.
(5) A penalty or consequence that may be specified
under paragraph (4) of this subsection may include and take
the form of reducing or eliminating the defaulting partner's
or transferee's proportionate transferable interest in a
partnership, subordinating the partner's or transferee's
transferable interest to that of non-defaulting partners or
transferees, forcing a sale of that transferable interest,
forfeiting the defaulting partner's or transferee's
transferable interest, the lending by other partners or
transferees of the amount necessary to meet the defaulting
partner's or transferee's commitment, a fixing of the value of
the defaulting partner's or transferee's transferable interest
by appraisal or by formula and redemption or sale of the
transferable interest at that value, or other penalty or
consequence.
(6) A written partnership agreement may supersede,
in whole or in part, the provisions of Division C and Division
D of Article 3 of Chapter 1.
(c) A partnership agreement may not:
(1) vary the nature of the partnership as a separate
legal entity under Section 10A-8A-1.04(a);
(2) vary a partnership's power under Section
10A-8A-1.05 to sue, be sued, and defend in its own name;
(3) vary the law applicable to a limited liability
partnership under Section 10A-8A-1.06;
(4) restrict rights under this chapter of a person
other than a partner, a dissociated partner, or a transferee;
(5) vary the requirements of Section 10A-8A-2.03;
(6) unreasonably restrict the right of access to
books and records under Section 10A-8A-4.10, but the
partnership agreement may impose reasonable restrictions on
the availability and use of information obtained under those
sections and may define appropriate remedies, including
liquidated damages, for a breach of any reasonable restriction
on use;
(7) eliminate the implied contractual covenant of
good faith and fair dealing as provided under Section
10A-8A-1.08(b)(1);
(8) eliminate or limit the liability of a partner or
other person for any act or omission that constitutes a bad
faith violation of the implied contractual covenant of good
faith and fair dealing as provided under Section
10A-8A-1.08(b)(2);
(9) waive the requirements of Section
10A-8A-4.04(e);
(10) reduce the limitations period specified under
Section 10A-8A-4.09(e) for an action commenced under other
applicable law;
(11) waive the prohibition on issuance of a
certificate of a transferable interest in bearer form under
Section 10A-8A-5.02(c);
(12) vary the power of a person to dissociate as a
partner under Section 10A-8A-6.02(a) except that the
partnership agreement may require that the notice under
Section 10A-8A-6.01(1) be in a writing or in a specific form
thereof;
(13) vary the right of a court to expel a partner in
the events specified in Section 10A-8A-6.01(5);
(14) vary the power of a court to decree dissolution
in the circumstances specified in Section 10A-9A-8.01(4) or
(5);
(15) vary the requirement to wind up the
partnership's business or not for profit activity as specified
in Section 10A-8A-8.01(4), (5), (6), or (7);
(16) vary the right of a partner to approve or
consent to the cancellation of a statement of limited
liability partnership as specified in Section 10A-8A-10.01(m);
or
(17) vary the rights of a partner under Section
10A-8A-9.10.
§10A-8A-1.09. Partnership agreement; effect on
partnership and persons admitted as partners.
(a) A partnership is bound by and may enforce the
partnership agreement, whether or not the partnership has
itself manifested assent to the partnership agreement.
(b) A person that is admitted as a partner of a
partnership becomes a party to and assents to the partnership
agreement except as provided in Section 10A-8A-5.02(g).
(c) Two or more persons intending to be the initial
partners of a partnership may make an agreement providing that
upon the formation of the partnership, the agreement will
become the partnership agreement.
§10A-8A-1.10. Partnership agreement; effect on third
parties and relationship to writings effective on behalf of
partnership.
(a) If a partnership agreement provides for the
manner in which it may be amended, including by requiring the
approval of a person who is not a party to the partnership
agreement or the satisfaction of conditions, it may be amended
only in that manner or as otherwise permitted by law, except
that the approval of any person may be waived by that person
and any conditions may be waived by all persons for whose
benefit those conditions were intended.
(b) A partnership agreement may provide rights to
any person, including a person who is not a party to the
partnership agreement, to the extent set forth in the
partnership agreement.
(c) The obligations of a partnership and its
partners to a person in the person's capacity as a transferee
or dissociated partner are governed by the partnership
agreement. A transferee and a dissociated partner are bound by
the partnership agreement.
(d) If a writing that has been delivered by a
partnership for filing in accordance with Chapter 1 and has
become effective conflicts with a provision of the partnership
agreement:
(1) the partnership agreement prevails as to
partners, dissociated partners, and transferees; and
(2) the writing prevails as to other persons to the
extent they reasonably rely on the writing.
§10A-8A-1.11. Required information.
A partnership shall maintain the following
information:
(1) A current list of the full name and last known
street and mailing address of each partner, in alphabetical
order.
(2) Copies of any filed statement.
(3) Copies of the partnership's federal, state, and
local income tax returns and reports, if any, for the three
most recent years.
(4) Copies of the then effective partnership
agreement and any amendment thereto, in each case to the
extent made in a writing.
(5) Copies of any financial statement of the
partnership for the three most recent years.
(6) Unless contained in a partnership agreement made
in a writing, a writing stating:
(A) the amount of cash, and a description and
statement of the agreed value of the other benefits,
contributed and agreed to be contributed by each partner;
(B) the times at which, or events on the happening
of which, any additional contributions agreed to be made by
each partner are to be made; and
(C) any events upon the happening of which the
partnership is to be dissolved and its business or not for
profit activity wound up.
§10A-8A-1.12. Transactions of partner with
partnership. A partner may lend money to and transact other
business or not for profit activity with the partnership and
has the same rights and obligations with respect to the loan
or other transaction as a person that is not a partner.
§10A-8A-1.13. Consent and proxies of partners.
Action requiring the consent of partners under this chapter
may be taken without a meeting, and a partner may appoint a
proxy to consent or otherwise act for the partner by signing a
writing of appointment, either personally or by the partner's
attorney in fact.
Article 2. Formation of Partnership; Property.
§10A-8A-2.01. Formation of partnership.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b),
the association of two or more persons:
(i) to carry on as co-owners a business for profit
forms a partnership, whether or not the persons intend to form
a partnership; or
(ii) to carry on any not for profit activity, forms
a partnership when (A) the persons intend to form a
partnership and (B) the persons deliver to the Secretary of
State for filing a statement of not for profit partnership in
accordance with Section 10A-8A-2.02(b) setting forth their
intention to form a partnership to carry on a not for profit
activity.
(b) An association formed under a statute other than
this chapter, a predecessor statute, or a comparable statute
of another jurisdiction is not a partnership under this
chapter.
(c) In determining whether a partnership is formed
under Section 10A-8A-2.01(a)(i), the following rules apply:
(1) Joint tenancy, tenancy in common, tenancy by the
entireties, joint property, common property, or part ownership
does not by itself establish a partnership, even if the
co-owners share profits made by the use of the property.
(2) The sharing of gross returns does not by itself
establish a partnership, even if the persons sharing them have
a joint or common right or interest in property from which the
returns are derived.
(3) A person who receives a share of the profits of
a business is presumed to be a partner in the business, unless
the profits were received in payment:
(i) of a debt by installments or otherwise;
(ii) for services as an independent contractor or of
wages or other compensation to an employee;
(iii) of rent;
(iv) of an annuity or other retirement or health
benefit to a beneficiary, representative, or designee of a
deceased or retired partner;
(v) of interest or other charge on a loan, even if
the amount of payment varies with the profits of the business,
including a direct or indirect present or future ownership of
the collateral, or rights to income, proceeds, or increase in
value derived from the collateral; or
(vi) for the sale of the goodwill of a business or
other property by installments or otherwise.
§10A-8A-2.02. Statement of partnership; statement of
not for profit partnership.
(a) A partnership other than a partnership that has
an effective statement of not for profit partnership or an
effective statement of limited liability partnership on file
with the Secretary of State may deliver to the Secretary of
State for filing a statement of partnership for the purpose of
having its partnership agreement governed by the laws of this
state in accordance with Section 10A-8A-1.06(d) and providing
notice of its existence in accordance with Section
10A-8A-1.03(d)(1). A statement of partnership must contain all
of the following:
(1) the name of the partnership which name must
comply with Article 5 of Chapter 1;
(2) the date that the partnership was formed
pursuant to, or became governed by, the laws of this state;
(3) the street and mailing address of its principal
office;
(4) the street and mailing address of a registered
office and the name of the registered agent at that office for
service of process in this state which the partnership shall
be required to maintain;
(5) a statement that the partnership was formed for
the purpose of carrying out a for profit business;
(6) a statement that the partnership has two or more
partners; and
(7) a statement that the partnership agreement is
governed by the laws of this state, and if the partnership
agreement is a written partnership agreement, a declaration
that the written partnership agreement has a provision stating
that the partnership agreement is governed by the laws of this
state.
(b) A partnership other than a partnership that has
an effective statement of partnership or an effective
statement of limited liability partnership on file with the
Secretary of State may deliver to the Secretary of State for
filing a statement of not for profit partnership for the
purpose of setting forth the partners' intention to form a
partnership to carry on a not for profit activity in
accordance with Section 10A-8A-2.01(a)(ii), having its
partnership agreement governed by the laws of this state in
accordance with Section 10A-8A-1.06(d), and providing notice
of its existence in accordance with Section 10A-8A-1.03(d)(2).
A statement of not for profit partnership must contain all of
the following:
(1) the name of the partnership which name must
comply with Article 5 of Chapter 1;
(2) the date that the partnership was formed
pursuant to, or became governed by, the laws of this state;
(3) the street and mailing address of its principal
office;
(4) the street and mailing address of a registered
office and the name of the registered agent at that office for
service of process in this state which the partnership shall
be required to maintain;
(5) a statement that the partnership was formed for
the purpose of carrying out a not for profit activity in
accordance with Section 10A-8A-2.01(a)(ii);
(6) a statement that the partnership has two or more
partners; and
(7) a statement that the partnership agreement is
governed by the laws of this state, and if the partnership
agreement is a written partnership agreement, a declaration
that the written partnership agreement has a provision stating
that the partnership agreement is governed by the laws of this
state.
(c) A statement of partnership and a statement of
not for profit partnership may be amended or restated from
time to time in accordance with Section 10A-1-4.26.
(d) A statement of partnership and a statement of
not for profit partnership shall be executed by two or more
partners authorized to execute the statement of partnership or
statement of not for profit partnership.
(e) A statement of partnership and a statement of
not for profit partnership shall be accompanied by a fee for
the Secretary of State in the amount prescribed by Section
10A-1-4.31.
(f) If a partnership complies with this section, the
Secretary of State shall file the statement of partnership or
the statement of not for profit partnership, as applicable.
(g) A statement of partnership or a statement of not
for profit partnership, as applicable, takes effect as
determined under Article 4 of Chapter 1.
(h) A partnership that has filed a statement of
partnership is for all purposes the same entity that existed
before the statement of partnership was filed and continues to
be a partnership under the laws of this state.
(i) A statement of partnership and a statement of
not for profit partnership are filing instruments for the
purposes of Chapter 1.
§10A-8A-2.03. Execution, filing, and recording of
statements.
(a) A statement may be delivered to the Secretary of
State for filing. A certified copy of a statement of authority
that was filed by the Secretary of State may be delivered to a
judge of probate for filing in accordance with Section
10A-8A-3.03(f) and (g). A certified copy of a statement that
is filed in an office in another jurisdiction may be delivered
to the Secretary of State for filing, and once filed by the
Secretary of State, may, in the case of a statement of
authority which is intended to have a similar effect to that
of a statement of authority under Section 10A-8A-3.03(f) or
(g), be delivered to the judge of probate for filing in
accordance with Section 10A-8A-3.03(f) or (g). Either filing
has the effect provided in this chapter with respect to
partnership property located in or transactions that occur in
this state.
(b) A certified copy of statement of authority filed
in the office of the Secretary of State and delivered to the
judge of probate for filing in the county or counties in which
the partnership has real property shall, without more, have
the effect of a recorded statement under this chapter with
respect to real property located in that county or those
counties. Any statement of authority recorded under the
preceding sentence that is not a certified copy of a statement
of authority filed in the office of the Secretary of State
does not have the effect provided for recorded statements of
authority in this chapter.
(c) Except as specifically provided otherwise in
this chapter, a statement filed by a partnership must be
executed by at least two partners. Other statements must be
executed by a partner or other person authorized by this
chapter. An individual who executes a statement as, or on
behalf of, a partner or other person named as a partner in a
statement shall personally declare under penalty of perjury
that the contents of the statement are accurate.
(d) Except as specifically provided otherwise in
this chapter, a person authorized by this chapter to file a
statement may amend or cancel the statement by filing an
amendment or cancellation that names the partnership,
identifies the statement, and states the substance of the
amendment or cancellation.
(e) A person who files a statement pursuant to this
section shall promptly send a copy of the statement to every
partner and to any other person named in the statement.
Failure to send a copy of a statement to a partner or other
person does not limit the effectiveness of the statement as to
a person not a partner.
(f) The Secretary of State may collect a fee for
filing or providing a certified copy of a statement in the
amount prescribed in Section 10A-1-4.31. The office of the
judge of probate may collect a fee for recording a certified
copy of statement in the amount prescribed in Section
10A-1-4.31.
(g) Each statement permitted or required under this
chapter to be delivered for filing to the Secretary of State
or judge of probate is a filing instrument.
§10A-8A-2.04. Partnership property. Property
acquired by a partnership is property of the partnership and
not of the partners individually.
§10A-8A-2.05. When property is partnership property.
(a) Property is partnership property if acquired in
the name of:
(1) the partnership; or
(2) one or more partners with an indication in the
instrument transferring title to the property of the person's
capacity as a partner or of the existence of a partnership but
without an indication of the name of the partnership.
(b) Property is acquired in the name of the
partnership by a transfer to:
(1) the partnership in its name; or
(2) one or more partners in their capacity as
partners in the partnership, if the name of the partnership is
indicated in the instrument transferring title to the
property.
(c) Property is presumed to be partnership property
if purchased with partnership assets, even if not acquired in
the name of the partnership or of one or more partners with an
indication in the instrument transferring title to the
property of the person's capacity as a partner or of the
existence of a partnership.
(d) Property acquired in the name of one or more of
the partners, without an indication in the instrument
transferring title to the property of the person's capacity as
a partner or of the existence of a partnership and without use
of partnership assets, is presumed to be separate property,
even if used for partnership purposes.
Article 3. Relations of Partners to Persons Dealing
with Partnership.
§10A-8A-3.01. Partner agent of partnership.
Subject to the effect of a statement of authority
under Section 10A-8A-3.03:
(1) Each partner is an agent of the partnership for
the purpose of its business or not for profit activity. An act
of a partner, including the execution of an instrument in the
partnership name, for apparently carrying on in the ordinary
course the partnership business or not for profit activity, or
business or not for profit activity of the kind carried on by
the partnership, binds the partnership, unless the partner had
no authority to act for the partnership in the particular
matter and the person with whom the partner was dealing knew
or had notice that the partner lacked authority.
(2) An act of a partner which is not apparently for
carrying on in the ordinary course the partnership business or
not for profit activity, or business or not for profit
activity of the kind carried on by the partnership, binds the
partnership only if the act was authorized by the other
partners.
§10A-8A-3.02. Transfer of partnership property.
(a) Partnership property may be transferred as
follows:
(1) Subject to the effect of a statement of
authority under Section 10A-8A-3.03, partnership property held
in the name of the partnership may be transferred by an
instrument of transfer executed by a partner in the
partnership name.
(2) Partnership property held in the name of one or
more partners with an indication in the instrument
transferring the property to them of their capacity as
partners or of the existence of a partnership, but without an
indication of the name of the partnership, may be transferred
by an instrument of transfer executed by the persons in whose
name the property is held.
(3) Partnership property held in the name of one or
more persons other than the partnership, without an indication
in the instrument transferring the property to them of their
capacity as partners or of the existence of a partnership, may
be transferred by an instrument of transfer executed by the
persons in whose name the property is held.
(b) A partnership may recover partnership property
from a transferee only if it proves that execution of the
instrument of initial transfer did not bind the partnership
under Section 10A-8A-3.01 and:
(1) as to a subsequent transferee who gave value for
property transferred under subsections (a)(1) and (2), proves
that the subsequent transferee knew or had received notice
that the person who executed the instrument of initial
transfer lacked authority to bind the partnership; or
(2) as to a transferee who gave value for property
transferred under subsection (a)(3), proves that the
transferee knew or had notice that the property was
partnership property and that the person who executed the
instrument of initial transfer lacked authority to bind the
partnership.
(c) A partnership may not recover partnership
property from a subsequent transferee if the partnership would
not have been entitled to recover the property, under
subsection (b), from any earlier transferee of the property.
§10A-8A-3.03. Statement of Authority.
(a) A partnership may deliver to the Secretary of
State for filing a statement of authority, which:
(1) must include the name of the partnership and:
(A) if the partnership has not filed a statement of
partnership, a statement of not for profit partnership, or a
statement of limited liability partnership, (i) the street and
mailing addresses of its principal office and (ii) if the
Secretary of State has assigned a unique identifying number or
other designation to the partnership, that number or
designation; or
(B) if the partnership has filed a statement of
partnership, a statement of not for profit partnership, or a
statement of limited liability partnership, (i) the street
address and mailing address of its principal office, (ii) the
name, street address, and mailing address of its registered
agent, and (iii) the unique identifying number or other
designation assigned to the partnership by the Secretary of
State.
(2) with respect to any position that exists in or
with respect to the partnership, may state the authority, or
limitations on the authority, of all persons holding the
position to:
(A) sign an instrument transferring real property
held in the name of the partnership; or
(B) enter into other transactions on behalf of, or
otherwise act for or bind, the partnership; and
(3) may state the authority, or limitations on the
authority, of a specific person to:
(A) sign an instrument transferring real property
held in the name of the partnership; or
(B) enter into other transactions on behalf of, or
otherwise act for or bind, the partnership.
(b) To amend or cancel a statement of authority
filed by the Secretary of State, a partnership must deliver to
the Secretary of State for filing an amendment or cancellation
stating:
(1) the name of the partnership;
(2) if the partnership has not filed a statement of
partnership, a statement of not for profit partnership, or a
statement of limited liability partnership, the street and
mailing addresses of the partnership's principal office;
(3) if the partnership has filed a statement of
partnership, a statement of not for profit partnership, or a
statement of limited liability partnership, the name and
street and mailing addresses of its registered agent;
(4) the date the statement of authority being
affected became effective; and
(5) the contents of the amendment or a declaration
that the statement of authority is canceled.
(c) A statement of authority affects only the power
of a person to bind a partnership to persons that are not
partners.
(d) Subject to subsection (c) and Section
10A-8A-1.03(d)(3) and except as otherwise provided in
subsections (f), (g), and (h), a limitation on the authority
of a person or a position contained in an effective statement
of authority is not by itself evidence of any person's
knowledge or notice of the limitation.
(e) Subject to subsection (c), a grant of authority
not pertaining to transfers of real property and contained in
an effective statement of authority is conclusive in favor of
a person that gives value in reliance on the grant, except to
the extent that when the person gives value:
(1) the person has knowledge to the contrary;
(2) the statement of authority has been canceled or
restrictively amended under subsection (b); or
(3) a limitation on the grant is contained in
another statement of authority that became effective after the
statement of authority containing the grant became effective.
(f) Subject to subsection (c), an effective
statement of authority that grants authority to transfer real
property held in the name of the partnership, a certified copy
of which statement of authority is recorded in the office of
the judge of probate in the county in which the real property
is located, is conclusive in favor of a person that gives
value in reliance on the grant without knowledge to the
contrary, except to the extent that when the person gives
value:
(1) the statement of authority has been canceled or
restrictively amended under subsection (b), and a certified
copy of the cancellation or restrictive amendment has been
recorded in the office of the judge of probate in the county
in which the real property is located; or
(2) a limitation on the grant is contained in
another statement of authority that became effective after the
statement of authority containing the grant became effective,
and a certified copy of the later-effective statement is
recorded in the office of the judge of probate in the county
in which the real property is located.
(g) Subject to subsection (c), if a certified copy
of an effective statement of authority containing a limitation
on the authority to transfer real property held in the name of
a partnership is recorded in the office of the judge of
probate in the county in which the real property is located,
all persons are deemed to know of the limitation with respect
to the real property located in that county.
(h) Subject to subsection (i), an effective
statement of dissolution is a cancellation of any filed
statement of authority for the purposes of subsection (f) and
is a limitation on authority for purposes of subsection (g).
(i) After a statement of dissolution becomes
effective, a partnership may deliver to the Secretary of State
for filing and, if appropriate, may record a statement of
authority that is designated as a post-dissolution statement
of authority. The statement operates as provided in
subsections (f) and (g).
(j) Unless canceled earlier, an effective statement
of authority is canceled by operation of law five years after
the date on which the statement, or its most recent amendment,
becomes effective. The cancellation is effective without
recording under subsection (f) or (g).
(k) An effective statement of denial operates as a
restrictive amendment under this section and may be recorded
by certified copy for purposes of subsection (f)(1).
§10A-8A-3.04. Statement of denial.
A person named in a filed statement of authority
granting that person authority may deliver to the Secretary of
State for filing a statement of denial that:
(1) provides the name of the partnership and the
caption of the statement of authority to which the statement
of denial pertains; and
(2) denies the grant of authority.
A statement of denial is a limitation on authority
as provided in Section 10A-8A-3.03.
§10A-8A-3.05. Partnership liable for partner's
actionable conduct.
(a) A partnership is liable for loss or injury
caused to a person, or for a penalty incurred, as a result of
a wrongful act or omission, or other actionable conduct, of a
partner acting in the ordinary course of business or not for
profit activity of the partnership or with authority of the
partnership.
(b) If, in the ordinary course of business or not
for profit activity of the partnership's business or not for
profit activity, or while acting with authority of the
partnership, a partner receives or causes the partnership to
receive money or property of a person not a partner, and the
money or property is misapplied by a partner, the partnership
is liable for the loss.
§10A-8A-3.06. Partner's liability.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)
or subsection (c), all partners are liable jointly and
severally for all obligations of the partnership unless
otherwise agreed by the claimant or provided by law.
(b) A person admitted as a partner into an existing
partnership is not personally liable for any partnership
obligation incurred before the person's admission as a
partner.
(c) Except as set forth in subsection (b) of Section
10A-8A-10.02, a debt, obligation, or other liability of a
partnership incurred while the partnership is a limited
liability partnership is solely the debt, obligation, or other
liability of the limited liability partnership. Except as set
forth in subsection (b) of Section 10A-8A-10.02, a partner in
a limited liability partnership is not personally liable or
accountable, directly or indirectly, including by way of
indemnification, contribution, assessment, or otherwise, for
debts, obligations, and liabilities of, or chargeable to, the
limited liability partnership, or another partner or partners,
whether arising in tort, contract, or otherwise, solely by
reason of being such a partner or acting, or omitting to act,
in such capacity, which such debts, obligations and
liabilities occur, are incurred or are assumed while the
partnership is a limited liability partnership. This
subsection applies (1) despite anything inconsistent in the
partnership agreement that existed immediately before the
partnership becomes a limited liability partnership and (2)
regardless of the dissolution of the limited liability
partnership.
(d) Subsection (c) of this section shall not affect
the liability of a limited liability partnership to the extent
of partnership assets for partnership debts, obligations and
liabilities.
(e) A partner in a limited liability partnership is
not a necessary or proper party to a proceeding by or against
a limited liability partnership, the object of which is to
recover any debts, obligations, or liabilities of, or
chargeable to, the limited liability partnership, unless the
partner is personally liable therefor under subsection (b) of
Section 10A-8A-10.02.
§10A-8A-3.07. Actions by and against partnership and
partners.
(a) A partnership may sue and be sued in the name of
the partnership.
(b) An action may be brought against the partnership
and, except as provided in Section 10A-8A-3.06, against any or
all of the partners in the same action or in separate actions.
(c) A judgment against a partnership is not by
itself a judgment against a partner. A judgment against a
partnership may not be satisfied from a partner's assets
unless there is also a judgment against the partner.
(d) A judgment creditor of a partner may not levy
execution against the assets of the partner to satisfy a
judgment based on a claim against the partnership unless the
claim is for a debt, obligation, or liability for which the
partner is personally liable as provided in Section
10A-8A-3.06 and either:
(1) a judgment based on the same claim has been
obtained against the partnership and a writ of execution on
the judgment has been returned unsatisfied in whole or in
part;
(2) the partnership is a debtor in bankruptcy;
(3) the partner has agreed that the creditor need
not exhaust partnership assets;
(4) a court grants permission to the judgment
creditor to levy execution against the assets of a partner
based on a finding that partnership assets subject to
execution are clearly insufficient to satisfy the judgment,
that exhaustion of partnership assets is excessively
burdensome, or that the grant of permission is an appropriate
exercise of the court's equitable powers; or
(5) liability is imposed on the partner by law or
contract independent of the existence of the partnership.
(e) This section applies to any partnership
liability or obligation resulting from a representation by a
partner or purported partner under Section 10A-8A-3.08.
§10A-8A-3.08. Liability of purported partner.
Except as provided in Section 10A-8A-3.06: (a) If a
person, by words or conduct, purports to be a partner, or
consents to being represented by another as a partner, in a
partnership or with one or more persons not partners, the
purported partner is liable to a person to whom the
representation is made, if that person, relying on the
representation, enters into a transaction with the actual or
purported partnership. If the representation, either by the
purported partner or by a person with the purported partner's
consent, is made in a public manner, the purported partner is
liable to a person who relies upon the purported partnership
even if the purported partner is not aware of being held out
as a partner to the claimant. If partnership liability
results, the purported partner is liable with respect to that
liability as if the purported partner were a partner. If no
partnership liability results, the purported partner is liable
with respect to that liability jointly and severally with any
other person consenting to the representation.
(b) If a person is thus represented to be a partner
in an existing partnership, or with one or more persons not
partners, the purported partner is an agent of persons
consenting to the representation to bind them to the same
extent and in the same manner as if the purported partner were
a partner, with respect to persons who enter into transactions
in reliance upon the representation. If all of the partners of
the existing partnership consent to the representation, a
partnership act or obligation results. If fewer than all of
the partners of the existing partnership consent to the
representation, the person acting and the partners consenting
to the representation are jointly and severally liable.
(c) A person is not liable as a partner merely
because the person is named by another in a statement of
authority.
(d) A person does not continue to be liable as a
partner merely because of a failure to file a statement of
dissociation or to amend a statement of authority to indicate
the partner's dissociation from the partnership.
(e) Except as otherwise provided in subsections (a)
and (b), persons who are not partners as to each other are not
liable as partners to other persons.
Article 4. Relations of Partners to Each Other and
to Partnership.
§10A-8A-4.01. Partner's rights and duties.
(a) Each partner is deemed to have an account that
is:
(1) credited with an amount equal to the money plus
the value of any other property, net of the amount of any
liabilities, the partner contributes to the partnership and
the partner's share of the partnership profits; and
(2) charged with an amount equal to the money plus
the value of any other property, net of the amount of any
liabilities, distributed by the partnership to the partner and
the partner's share of the partnership losses provided that a
partner shall not be charged with any share of partnership
loss attributable to a debt, obligation or liability for which
the partner is not personally liable under Section 10A-8A-3.06
unless the loss is satisfied out of partnership assets.
(b) Each partner is entitled to an equal share of
the partnership profits and, subject to the limitations in
subsection (a)(2) of this section, is chargeable with a share
of the partnership losses in proportion to the partner's share
of the profits.
(c) A partnership shall reimburse a partner for
payments made and indemnify a partner for liabilities incurred
by the partner in the ordinary course of the business or not
for profit activity of the partnership or for the preservation
of its business or not for profit activity or property;
provided, however, no partner in a limited liability
partnership shall be required as a consequence of the
indemnification to make any payment on behalf of the limited
liability partnership to any other partners to the extent that
the payment would be inconsistent with Sections 10A-8A-3.06,
10A-8A-8.06, or 10A-8A-8.07.
(d) A partnership shall reimburse a partner for an
advance beyond the amount of capital the partner agreed to
contribute.
(e) A payment or advance made by a partner which
gives rise to a partnership obligation under subsection (c) or
(d) constitutes a loan to the partnership which accrues
interest from the date of the payment or advance.
(f) Each partner has equal rights in the management
and conduct of the partnership business or not for profit
activity.
(g) A partner may use or possess partnership
property only on behalf of the partnership.
(h) A partner is not entitled to remuneration for
services performed for the partnership, except for reasonable
compensation for services rendered in winding up the business
or not for profit activity of the partnership.
(i) A difference arising as to a matter in the
ordinary course of business or not for profit activity of a
partnership may be decided by a majority of the partners. An
act outside the ordinary course of business or not for profit
activity of a partnership and an amendment to the partnership
agreement may be undertaken only with the consent of all of
the partners.
(j) This section does not affect the obligations of
a partnership to other persons under Section 10A-8A-3.01.
§10A-8A-4.02. Admission of partner.
(a) The initial partners of a partnership are
admitted as partners upon the formation of the partnership.
(b) After formation, a person is admitted as a
partner of the partnership:
(1) as provided in the partnership agreement;
(2) as the result of a transaction effective under
Article 9 of this chapter or Article 8 of Chapter 1;
(3) with the consent of all the partners; or
(4) as provided in Section 10A-8A-8.01(6) or
10A-8A-8.01(7).
(c) Each person to be admitted as a partner to a
partnership formed under either Section 10A-8A-2.01(a)(i) or
10A-8A-2.01(a)(ii) may be admitted as a partner without:
(1) acquiring a transferable interest; or
(2) making or being obligated to make a contribution
to the partnership.
§10A-8A-4.03. Form of contribution. A contribution
by a partner may be made to a partnership as agreed by the
partners.
§10A-8A-4.04. Liability for contribution.
(a) A partner's obligation to make a contribution to
a partnership is not excused by the partner's death,
disability, or other inability to perform personally.
(b) If a partner does not make a contribution
required by an enforceable promise, the partner or the
partner's estate is obligated, at the election of the
partnership, to contribute money equal to the value of the
portion of the contribution that has not been made. The
foregoing election shall be in addition to, and not in lieu
of, any other rights, including the right to specific
performance, that the partnership may have under the
partnership agreement or applicable law.
(c) The obligation of a partner to make a
contribution to a partnership may be compromised only by
consent of all partners. A conditional obligation of a partner
to make a contribution to a partnership may not be enforced
unless the conditions of the obligation have been satisfied or
waived as to or by that partner. Conditional obligations
include contributions payable upon a discretionary call of a
partnership before the time the call occurs.
(d) A creditor of a limited liability partnership
which extends credit or otherwise acts in reliance on an
obligation described in subsection (a), without notice of any
compromise under this subsection, may enforce the original
obligation.
(e) A promise by a partner to make a contribution to
a partnership is not enforceable unless set forth in a writing
signed by the partner.
§10A-8A-4.05. Sharing of distributions before
dissolution. All partners shall share equally in any
distributions made by a partnership before its dissolution and
winding up.
§10A-8A-4.06. Interim distributions. Subject to
Section 10A-8A-7.01, a partner has a right to a distribution
before the dissolution and winding up of a partnership as
provided in the partnership agreement. A decision to make a
distribution before the dissolution and winding up of the
partnership is a decision in the ordinary course of the
business or not for profit activity of the partnership.
§10A-8A-4.07. Distribution in kind. A partner does
not have a right to demand and receive a distribution from a
partnership in any form other than money. Except as otherwise
provided in Section 10A-8A-8.07, a partnership may distribute
an asset in kind if each partner receives a percentage of the
asset in proportion to the partner's share of distributions.
§10A-8A-4.08. Right to distribution. If a partner
becomes entitled to receive a distribution, the partner has
the status of, and is entitled to all remedies available to, a
creditor of the partnership with respect to the distribution.
However, the partnership's obligation to make a distribution
is subject to offset for any amount owed to the partnership by
the partner or dissociated partner on whose account the
distribution is made.
§10A-8A-4.09. Limitations on distribution and
liability for improper distributions.
(a) A limited liability partnership shall not make a
distribution to a partner to the extent that at the time of
the distribution, after giving effect to the distribution, all
liabilities of the limited liability partnership, other than
liabilities to partners on account of their transferable
interests and liabilities for which the recourse of creditors
is limited to specific property of the limited liability
partnership, exceed the fair value of the assets of the
limited liability partnership, except that the fair value of
the property that is subject to a liability for which recourse
of creditors is limited shall be included in the assets of the
limited liability partnership only to the extent that the fair
value of the property exceeds that liability.
(b) A partner who consents to a distribution in
violation of subsection (a) or the partnership agreement, and
who knew at the time of the distribution that the distribution
violated subsection (a) or the partnership agreement, shall be
liable to the limited liability partnership for the amount of
that distribution.
(c) A partner who receives a distribution in
violation of subsection (a) or the partnership agreement, and
who knew at the time of the distribution that the distribution
violated subsection (a) or the partnership agreement, shall be
liable to the limited liability partnership for the amount of
the distribution received by that partner. A partner who
receives a distribution in violation of subsection (a) or the
partnership agreement, and who did not know at the time of the
distribution that the distribution violated subsection (a) or
the partnership agreement, shall not be liable for the amount
of the distribution received by that partner.
(d) Except as provided in subsection (e), this
section shall not affect any obligation or liability of a
partner under other applicable law for the amount of a
distribution.
(e) An action under this section or other applicable
law is barred if not commenced within two years after the
distribution.
(f) For purposes of subsection (a), "distribution"
does not include amounts constituting reasonable compensation
for present or past services or reasonable payments made in
the ordinary course of the limited liability partnership's
business or not for profit activity under a bona fide
retirement plan or other benefits program.
(g) This section shall not apply to distributions
made in accordance with Section 10A-8A-8.09.
§10A-8A-4.10. Right of partner and former partner to
information.
Notwithstanding Sections 10A-1-3.32 and 10A-1-3.33:
(a) Subject to subsection (f), a partner, without
having any particular purpose for seeking the information, may
inspect and copy during regular hours at a reasonable location
specified by the partnership, required information and any
other records maintained by the partnership regarding the
partnership's business or not for profit activity and
financial condition.
(b) Subject to subsection (f), each partner and the
partnership shall furnish to a partner:
(1) without demand, any information concerning the
partnership's business or not for profit activity reasonably
required for the proper exercise of the partner's rights and
duties under the partnership agreement or this chapter; and
(2) on demand, any other information concerning the
partnership's business or not for profit activity, except to
the extent the demand or the information demanded is
unreasonable or otherwise improper under the circumstances.
(c) Subject to subsections (e) and (f), on 10 days'
demand made in a writing received by the partnership, a person
dissociated as a partner may have access to the information
and records described in subsection (a) at the location
specified in subsection (a) if:
(1) the information or writing pertains to the
period during which the person was a partner;
(2) the person seeks the information or record in
good faith; and
(3) it is determined that:
(i) the person seeks the information for a purpose
reasonably related to the person's interest as a partner;
(ii) the person's demand describes with reasonable
particularity the information sought and the purpose for
seeking the information; and
(iii) the information sought is directly connected
to the person's purpose.
(d) Within 10 days after receiving a demand pursuant
to subsection (c), the partnership in a writing shall inform
the person that made the demand:
(1) what information the partnership will provide in
response to the demand;
(2) when and where the partnership will provide the
information;
(3) if the partnership declines to provide any
demanded information, the partnership's reasons for declining;
and
(4) what, if any, restrictions will be imposed
pursuant to the partnership agreement or subsection (f).
(e) If a partner dies, Section 10A-8A-5.04 applies.
(f) In addition to any restriction or condition
stated in its partnership agreement, a partnership, as to a
matter within the ordinary course of its business or not for
profit activity, may:
(1) impose reasonable restrictions and conditions on
access to and use of information to be furnished under this
section, including designating information confidential and
imposing nondisclosure and safeguarding obligations on the
recipient; and
(2) keep confidential from the partners and any
other person, for such period of time as the partnership deems
reasonable, any information that the partnership reasonably
believes to be in the nature of trade secrets or other
information the disclosure of which the partnership in good
faith believes is not in the best interest of the partnership
or could damage the partnership or its business or not for
profit activity, or that the partnership is required by law or
by agreement with a third party to keep confidential.
In any dispute concerning the reasonableness of a
restriction under this subsection, the partnership has the
burden of proving reasonableness.
(g) A partnership may charge a person that makes a
demand under this section reasonable costs of copying, limited
to the costs of labor and material.
(h) A partner or person dissociated as a partner may
exercise the rights under this section through an attorney or
other agent. Any restriction imposed under subsection (f) or
by the partnership agreement applies both to the attorney or
other agent and to the partner or person dissociated as a
partner.
(i) The rights under this section do not extend to a
person as transferee, but the rights under subsection (c) of a
person dissociated as a partner may be exercised by the legal
representative of an individual who dissociated as a partner
under Section 10A-8A-6.01(6).
(j) Any partner who, without reasonable cause,
refuses to allow any partner or person dissociated as a
partner, or their agent or attorney to inspect or copy any
records of the partnership to which such partner or person
dissociated as a partner is entitled under this section, shall
be personally liable to the partner or person dissociated as a
partner for a penalty in an amount not to exceed 10 percent of
the fair market value of the transferable interest of the
partner or person dissociated as a partner, in addition to any
other damages or remedy.
§10A-8A-4.11. General standards of partner's
conduct.
(a) The duties that a partner has to the partnership
and to the other partners include the duty of loyalty and the
duty of care as described in subsections (b) and (c).
(b) A partner's duty of loyalty to the partnership
and to the other partners includes each of the following:
(1) to account to the partnership and to hold as
trustee for it any property, profit, or benefit derived by the
partner in the conduct or winding up of the partnership's
business or not for profit activity or derived from a use by
the partner of partnership property, including the
appropriation of a partnership opportunity;
(2) to refrain from dealing with the partnership in
the conduct or winding up of the partnership's business or not
for profit activity as or on behalf of a party having an
interest adverse to the partnership; and
(3) to refrain from competing with the partnership
in the conduct or winding up of the partnership's business or
not for profit activity.
(c) A partner's duty of care to the partnership and
to the other partners in the conduct or winding up of the
partnership's business or not for profit activity includes
refraining from engaging in grossly negligent or reckless
conduct, intentional misconduct, or a knowing violation of
law.
(d) A partner shall discharge the duties to the
partnership and to the other partners under this chapter and
under the partnership agreement and exercise any rights
consistently with the implied contractual covenant of good
faith and fair dealing.
(e) A partner does not violate a duty or obligation
under this chapter or under the partnership agreement merely
because the partner's conduct furthers the partner's own
interest.
§10A-8A-4.12. Reliance on reports and information. A
partner of a partnership shall be fully protected in relying
in good faith upon the records of the partnership and upon
information, opinions, reports, or statements presented by
another partner or agent of the partnership, or by any other
person as to matters the partner reasonably believes are
within that other person's professional or expert competence,
including information, opinions, reports, or statements as to
the value and amount of the assets, liabilities, profits, or
losses of the partnership, or the value and amount of assets
or reserves or contracts, agreements, or other undertakings
that would be sufficient to pay claims and obligations of the
partnership, or to make reasonable provision to pay those
claims and obligations, or any other facts pertinent to the
existence and amount of assets from which distributions to
partners or creditors might properly be paid.
§10A-8A-4.13. Actions by partnership and partners.
(a) Except as provided in Sections 10A-8A-3.06,
10A-8A-8.06, or 10A-8A-8.07, a partnership may maintain an
action against a partner for a breach of the partnership
agreement, or for the violation of a duty to the partnership,
causing harm to the partnership.
(b) Except as provided in Sections 10A-8A-3.06,
10A-8A-8.06, or 10A-8A-8.07, a partner may maintain an action
against the partnership or another partner for legal or
equitable relief, with or without an accounting as to
partnership business or not for profit activity, to:
(1) enforce the partner's rights under the
partnership agreement;
(2) enforce the partner's rights under this chapter,
including:
(i) the partner's rights under Sections 10A-8A-4.01,
10A-8A-4.03, or 10A-8A-4.04;
(ii) the partner's right on dissociation to have the
partner's transferable interest in the partnership purchased
pursuant to Section 10A-8A-7.01 or enforce any other right
under Article 6 or 7; or
(iii) the partner's right to compel a dissolution
and winding up of the partnership's business or not for profit
activity under Section 10A-8A-8.01 or enforce any other right
under Article 8; or
(3) enforce the rights and otherwise protect the
interests of the partner, including rights and interests
arising independently of the partnership relationship.
(c) The accrual of, and any time limitation on, a
right of action for a remedy under this section is governed by
other law. A right to an accounting upon a dissolution and
winding up does not revive a claim barred by law.
§10A-8A-4.14. Continuation of partnership beyond
definite term or particular undertaking.
(a) If a partnership for a definite term or
particular undertaking is continued, without an express
agreement, after the expiration of the term or completion of
the undertaking, the rights and duties of the partners remain
the same as they were at the expiration or completion, so far
as is consistent with a partnership at will.
(b) If the partners, or those of them who habitually
acted in the business or not for profit activity during the
term or undertaking, continue the business or not for profit
activity without any settlement or liquidation of the
partnership, they are presumed to have agreed that the
partnership will continue.
Article 5. Transferees and Creditors of Partners.
§10A-8A-5.01. Partner's transferable interest in
partnership. The only interest of a partner which is
transferable is the partner's transferable interest. A
transferable interest is personal property.
§10A-8A-5.02. Transfer of partner's transferable
interest.
(a) A transfer, in whole or in part, of a partner's
transferable interest:
(1) is permissible;
(2) does not by itself cause the partner's
dissociation;
(3) does not by itself cause a dissolution and
winding up of the partnership; and
(4) subject to Section 10A-8A-5.05, does not entitle
the transferee to:
(A) participate in the management or conduct of the
partnership's business or not for profit activity; or
(B) except as otherwise provided in subsection (d),
have access to required information, records, or other
information concerning the partnership's business or not for
profit activity.
(b) A transferee has a right:
(1) to receive, in accordance with the transfer,
distributions to which the transferor would otherwise be
entitled;
(2) to receive upon the dissolution and winding up
of the partnership, in accordance with the transfer, the net
amount otherwise distributable to the transferor; and
(3) to seek under Section 10A-8A-8.01(5) a judicial
determination that it is equitable to wind up the partnership
business or not for profit activity.
(c) A transferable interest may be evidenced by a
certificate of transferable interest issued by the
partnership. A partnership agreement may provide for the
transfer of the transferable interest represented by the
certificate and make other provisions with respect to the
certificate. No certificate of transferable interest shall be
issued in bearer form.
(d) In a dissolution and winding up, a transferee is
entitled to an account of the partnership's transactions only
from the date of dissolution.
(e) Except as otherwise provided in Sections
10A-8A-6.01(4), 10A-8A-6.01(11), and 10A-9A-6.01(12), when a
partner transfers a transferable interest, the transferor
retains the rights of a partner other than the right to
distributions transferred and retains all duties and
obligations of a partner.
(f) A partnership need not give effect to a
transferee's rights under this section until the partnership
has notice of the transfer.
(g) When a partner transfers a transferable interest
to a person that is admitted as a partner with respect to the
transferred interest, the transferee is liable for the
partner's obligations under Sections 10A-8A-4.04 and
10A-8A-4.09 to the extent that the obligations are known to
the transferee when the transferee voluntarily accepts
admission as a partner.
§10A-8A-5.03. Rights of creditor of partner or
transferee.
(a) On application to a court of competent
jurisdiction by any judgment creditor of a partner or
transferee, the court may charge the transferable interest of
the judgment debtor with payment of the unsatisfied amount of
the judgment with interest. To the extent so charged and after
the partnership has been served with the charging order, the
judgment creditor has only the right to receive any
distribution or distributions to which the judgment debtor
would otherwise be entitled in respect of the transferable
interest.
(b) The partnership, after being served with a
charging order and its terms, shall be entitled to pay or
deposit any distribution or distributions to which the
judgment debtor would otherwise be entitled in respect of the
charged transferable interest into the hands of the clerk of
the court so issuing the charging order, and the payment or
deposit shall discharge the partnership and the judgment
debtor from liability for the amount so paid or deposited and
any interest that might accrue thereon. Upon receipt of the
payment or deposit, the clerk of the court shall notify the
judgment creditor of the receipt of the payment or deposit.
The judgment creditor shall, after any payment or deposit into
the court, petition the court for payment of so much of the
amount paid or deposited as is held by the court as may be
necessary to pay the judgment creditor's judgment. To the
extent the court has excess amounts paid or deposited on hand
after the payment to the judgment creditor, the excess amounts
paid or deposited shall be distributed to the judgment debtor
and the charging order shall be extinguished. The court, may
in its discretion, order the clerk to deposit, pending the
judgment creditor's petition, any money paid or deposited with
the clerk, in an interest bearing account at a bank authorized
to receive deposits of public funds.
(c) A charging order constitutes a lien on the
judgment debtor's transferable interest.
(d) Subject to subsection (c):
(1) a judgment debtor that is a partner retains the
rights of a partner and remains subject to all duties and
obligations of a partner; and
(2) a judgment debtor that is a transferee retains
the rights of a transferee and remains subject to all duties
and obligations of a transferee.
(e) This chapter does not deprive any partner or
transferee of the benefit of any exemption laws applicable to
the partner's or transferee's transferable interest.
(f) This section provides the exclusive remedy by
which a judgment creditor of a partner or transferee may
satisfy a judgment out of the judgment debtor's transferable
interest and the judgment creditor shall have no right to
foreclose, under this chapter or any other law, upon the
charging order, the charging order lien, or the judgment
debtor's transferable interest. A judgment creditor of a
partner or transferee shall have no right to obtain possession
of, or otherwise exercise legal or equitable remedies with
respect to, the property of a partnership. Court orders for
actions or requests for accounts and inquiries that the
judgment debtor might have made, are not available to the
judgment creditor attempting to satisfy the judgment out of
the judgment debtor's transferable interest and may not be
ordered by a court.
§10A-8A-5.04. Power of personal representative of
deceased partner.
If a partner dies, the deceased partner's personal
representative or other legal representative may:
(a) for the period of time that the deceased
partner's personal representative or other legal
representative holds the deceased partner's transferable
interest:
(1) exercise the rights of a holder of transferable
interests under this chapter;
(2) exercise the rights of a transferee under
Section 10A-8A-5.02; and
(3) for purposes of settling the estate, exercise
the rights of a current partner under Section 10A-8A-4.10; and
(b) for the period of time that the deceased
partner's personal representative or other legal
representative does not hold the deceased partner's
transferable interest, for purposes of settling the estate,
exercise the rights of a person dissociated as a partner under
Section 10A-8A-4.10.
Article 6. Partner's Dissociation.
§10A-8A-6.01. Events causing partner's dissociation.
A person is dissociated from a partnership as a
partner upon the occurrence of any of the following events:
(1) the partnership has notice of the person's
express will to dissociate as a partner, except that if the
person specifies a dissociation date later than the date the
partnership had notice, then the person is dissociated as a
partner on that later date;
(2) an event stated in the partnership agreement as
causing the person's dissociation as a partner occurs;
(3) the person is expelled as a partner pursuant to
the partnership agreement;
(4) the person is expelled as a partner by the
unanimous consent of the other partners if:
(A) it is unlawful to carry on the partnership's
business or not for profit activity with the person as a
partner;
(B) there has been a transfer of all of the person's
transferable interest in the partnership, other than a
transfer for security purposes;
(C) the person is an organization and, within 90
days after the partnership notifies the person that it will be
expelled as a partner because it has filed a statement of
dissolution or the equivalent, or its right to conduct
business or not for profit activity has been suspended by its
jurisdiction of formation, the statement of dissolution or the
equivalent has not been revoked or its right to conduct
business or not for profit activity has not been reinstated;
or
(D) the person is an organization and, within 90
days after the partnership notifies the person that it will be
expelled as a partner because the person has been dissolved
and its business or not for profit activity is being wound up,
the organization has not been reinstated or the dissolution
and winding up have not been revoked or cancelled;
(5) on application by the partnership, the person is
expelled as a partner by judicial order because the person:
(A) has engaged, or is engaging, in wrongful conduct
that has adversely and materially affected, or will adversely
and materially affect, the partnership's business or not for
profit activity;
(B) has willfully or persistently committed, or is
willfully or persistently committing, a material breach of the
partnership agreement or the person's duty or obligation under
this chapter or other applicable law; or
(C) has engaged, or is engaging, in conduct relating
to the business or not for profit activity of the partnership
that makes it not reasonably practicable to carry on the
business or not for profit activity with the person as
partner;
(6) in the case of a person who is an individual,
the person dies, there is appointed a guardian or general
conservator for the person or there is a judicial
determination that the person has otherwise become incapable
of performing the person's duties as a partner under this
chapter or the partnership agreement;
(7) the person becomes a debtor in bankruptcy,
executes an assignment for the benefit of creditors, or seeks,
consents, or acquiesces to the appointment of a trustee,
receiver, or liquidator of the person or of all or
substantially all of the person's property;
(8) in the case of a person that is a trust or is
acting as a partner by virtue of being a trustee of a trust,
the trust's entire transferable interest in the partnership is
distributed, but not solely by reason of the substitution of a
successor trustee;
(9) in the case of a person that is an estate or is
acting as a partner by virtue of being a personal
representative of an estate, the estate's entire transferable
interest in the partnership is distributed, but not solely by
reason of the substitution of a successor personal
representative;
(10) in the case of a person that is not an
individual, the legal existence of the person otherwise
terminates;
(11) the transfer of a partner's entire remaining
transferable interest to another partner;
(12) the transfer of a partner's entire remaining
transferable interest to a transferee upon the transferee's
becoming a partner; or
(13) the partnership's participation in a conversion
or merger under Article 9, or Article 8 of Chapter 1 of this
title if the partnership:
(A) is not the converted or surviving entity; or
(B) is the converted or surviving entity but, as a
result of the conversion or merger, the person ceases to be a
partner.
§10A-8A-6.02. Partner's power to dissociate;
wrongful dissociation.
(a) A person has the power to dissociate as a
partner at any time, rightfully or wrongfully, by express will
pursuant to Section 10A-8A-6.01(1).
(b) A person's dissociation is wrongful only if:
(1) it is in breach of an express provision of the
partnership agreement; or
(2) in the case of a partnership for a definite term
or particular undertaking, before the expiration of the term
or the completion of the undertaking if any of the following
apply:
(A) the person dissociates as a partner by express
will, unless the dissociation follows not later than 90 days
after another person's dissociation by death or otherwise
under Section 10A-8A-6.01(6) through (10) or wrongful
dissociation under this subsection;
(B) the person is expelled as a partner by judicial
order under Section 10A-8A-6.01(5);
(C) the person is dissociated under Section
10A-8A-6.01(7); or
(D) in the case of a person that is not a trust
other than a business trust, an estate, or an individual, the
person is expelled or otherwise dissociated because it
willfully dissolved or terminated.
(c) A person that wrongfully dissociates as a
partner is liable to the partnership and to the other partners
for damages caused by the dissociation. The liability is in
addition to any debt, obligation, or other liability of the
partner to the partnership or the other partners.
§10A-8A-6.03. Effect of partner's dissociation.
(a) If a person's dissociation results in a
dissolution and winding up of the partnership business or not
for profit activity, Article 8 applies; otherwise, Article 7
applies.
(b) Upon a person's dissociation as a partner:
(1) the person's right to participate in the
management and conduct of the partnership business or not for
profit activity terminates, except as provided in Section
10A-8A-8.03;
(2) the person's duty of loyalty under Section
10A-8A-4.11 (b)(3) terminates; and
(3) the person's duty of loyalty under Section
10A-8A-4.11 (b)(1) and (2) and duty of care under Section 10A-8A-4.11
(c) continue only with regard to matters arising and
events occurring before the person's dissociation, unless the
partner participates in winding up the partnership's business
or not for profit activity pursuant to Section 10A-8A-.03.
Article 7. Person's Dissociation as a Partner when
Business or Not for Profit Activity Not Wound up.
§10A-8A-7.01. Purchase of transferable interest of a
person dissociated as a partner.
(a) If a person is dissociated as a partner from a
partnership without resulting in a dissolution and winding up
of the partnership business or not for profit activity under
Section 10A-8A-8.01, the partnership shall cause that person's
transferable interest in the partnership owned by that person
at the time of dissociation to be purchased for a buyout price
determined pursuant to subsection (b).
(b) The buyout price of the transferable interest
owned by the person at the time of dissociation as a partner
is an amount equal to the fair value of that person's
transferable interest as of the date of dissociation. Interest
on the buyout price must be paid from the date of dissociation
to the date of payment.
(c) Damages for wrongful dissociation under Sections
10A-8A-6.02(b) and (c), and all other amounts owing, whether
or not presently due, from the person dissociated as a partner
to the partnership, must be offset against the buyout price.
Interest on damages for wrongful dissociation must be paid
from the date of the wrongful dissociation to the date of
payment. Interest on all other amounts, whether or not
presently due, must be paid from the date the amount owed
becomes due to the date of payment.
(d) A partnership shall indemnify a person
dissociated as a partner whose transferable interest is being
purchased against all partnership liabilities, whether
incurred before or after the dissociation, except liabilities
incurred by an act of the person dissociated as a partner
under Section 10A-8A-7.02.
(e) If no agreement for the purchase of the
transferable interests of a person dissociated as a partner is
reached within 120 days after a written demand for payment,
the partnership shall pay, or cause to be paid, in cash to the
person dissociated as a partner the amount the partnership
estimates to be the buyout price and accrued interest, reduced
by any offsets and accrued interest under subsection (c).
(f) If a deferred payment is authorized under
subsection (h), the partnership may tender a written offer to
pay the amount it estimates to be the buyout price and accrued
interest, reduced by any offsets under subsection (c), stating
the time of payment, the amount and type of security for
payment, and the other terms and conditions of the obligation.
(g) The payment or tender required by subsection (e)
or (f) must be accompanied by the following:
(1) a written statement of partnership assets and
liabilities as of the date of dissociation;
(2) the latest available partnership balance sheet
and income statement, if any;
(3) a written explanation of how the estimated
amount of the payment was calculated; and
(4) written notice which shall state that the
payment is in full satisfaction of the obligation to purchase
unless, within 120 days after the written notice, the person
dissociated as a partner commences an action to determine the
buyout price of that person's transferable interest, any
offsets under subsection (c), or other terms of the obligation
to purchase.
(h) A person that wrongfully dissociates as a
partner before the expiration of a definite term or the
completion of a particular undertaking is not entitled to
payment of any portion of the buyout price until the
expiration of the term or completion of the undertaking,
unless the person establishes to the satisfaction of the court
that earlier payment will not cause undue hardship to the
business or not for profit activity of the partnership. A
deferred payment under this subsection must bear interest and,
to the extent it would not cause undue hardship to the
business or not for profit activity of the partnership, be
adequately secured.
(i) A person dissociated as a partner may maintain
an action against the partnership, pursuant to Section
10A-8A-4.13(b)(2)(ii), to determine the buyout price of that
person's transferable interest under subsection (b), any
offsets under subsection (c), or other terms of the obligation
to purchase. The action must be commenced within 120 days
after the partnership has tendered payment or an offer to pay
or within one year after written demand for payment if no
payment or offer to pay is tendered. The court shall determine
the buyout price of that person's transferable interest under
subsection (b), any offset due under subsection (c), and
accrued interest, and enter judgment for any additional
payment or refund. If deferred payment is authorized under
subsection (h), the court shall also determine the security,
if any, for payment and other terms of the obligation to
purchase. The court may assess reasonable attorney's fees and
the fees and expenses of appraisers or other experts for a
party to the action, in amounts the court finds equitable,
against a party that the court finds acted arbitrarily,
vexatiously, or not in good faith. The finding may be based on
the partnership's failure to tender payment or an offer to pay
or to comply with subsection (g).
§10A-8A-7.02. Power to bind and liability of person
dissociated as a partner.
(a) For one year after a person dissociates as a
partner without resulting in a dissolution and winding up of
the partnership business or not for profit activity, the
partnership, including a surviving partnership or other
surviving entity under Article 9 of this chapter and Article 8
of Chapter 1, is bound by an act of the person dissociated as
a partner which would have bound the partnership under Section
10A-8A-3.01 before dissociation only if at the time of
entering into the transaction the other party:
(1) reasonably believed that the person dissociated
as a partner was then a partner and reasonably relied on such
belief in entering into the transaction;
(2) did not have notice of the person's dissociation
as a partner; and
(3) is not deemed to have had knowledge or notice
under Section 10A-8A-1.03.
(b) A person dissociated as a partner is liable to
the partnership for any damage caused to the partnership
arising from an obligation incurred by the person dissociated
as a partner after dissociation for which the partnership is
liable under subsection (a).
§10A-8A-7.03. Liability of person dissociated as a
partner to other persons.
(a) A person's dissociation as a partner does not of
itself discharge that person's liability for a partnership
obligation incurred before dissociation. A person dissociated
as a partner is not liable for a partnership obligation
incurred after dissociation, except as provided in subsection
(b).
(b) A person that dissociates as a partner without
resulting in a dissolution and winding up of the partnership
business or not for profit activity is liable as a partner to
the other party in a transaction entered into by the
partnership, or a surviving partnership or other surviving
entity under Article 9 of this chapter or Article 8 of Chapter
1, within one year after the partner's dissociation, only if
the partner is liable for the obligation under Section
10A-8A-3.06 and at the time of entering into the transaction
the other party:
(1) reasonably believed that the person dissociated
as a partner was then a partner and reasonably relied on such
belief in entering into the transaction;
(2) did not have notice of the person's
dissociation; and
(3) is not deemed to have had knowledge or notice
under Section 10A-8A-1.03 of the person's dissociation.
(c) By agreement with the partnership creditor and
the partners continuing the business or not for profit
activity, a person dissociated as a partner may be released
from liability for a partnership obligation.
(d) A person dissociated as a partner is released
from liability for a partnership obligation if a partnership
creditor, with notice of the person's dissociation but without
the person's consent, agrees to a material alteration in the
nature or time of payment of a partnership obligation.
§10A-8A-7.04. Statement of dissociation.
(a) A person dissociated as a partner or the
partnership may file a statement of dissociation stating the
name of the partnership and that the person is dissociated as
a partner from the partnership.
(b) A statement of dissociation is a limitation on
the authority of a person dissociated as a partner for the
purposes of Section10A-8A-3.03.
§10A-8A-7.05. Continued use of partnership name.
Continued use of a partnership name, or a person's name that
is dissociated as a partner as part thereof, by partners
continuing the business or not for profit activity does not of
itself make the person dissociated as a partner liable for an
obligation of the partners or the partnership continuing the
business or not for profit activity.
Article 8. Dissolution and Winding Up.
§10A-8A-8.01. Events of dissolution.
A partnership is dissolved, and its business or not
for profit activity must be wound up, upon the occurrence of
the first of the following events:
(1) in a partnership at will, the partnership knows
or has notice of a person's express will to dissociate as a
partner, other than a partner that has dissociated under
Section 10A-8A-6.01(2) through (10), but, if the person has
specified a dissociation date later than the date the
partnership knew or had notice, on the later date;
(2) in a partnership for a definite term or
particular undertaking:
(i) within 90 days after a partner's dissociation by
death or otherwise under Section 10A-8A-6.01(6) through (10),
or a partner's wrongful dissociation under Section
10A-8A-6.02(b), at least half of the remaining partners
affirmatively consent to dissolve the partnership and wind up
the partnership business or not for profit activity, for which
purpose a partner's rightful dissociation pursuant to Section
10A-8A-6.02(b)(2)(A) constitutes the expression of that
partner's will to wind up the business or not for profit
activity of the partnership;
(ii) the consent of all of the partners to dissolve
and wind up the partnership's business or not for profit
activity; or
(iii) the expiration of the term or the completion
of the undertaking;
(3) an event or circumstance that the partnership
agreement states causes dissolution;
(4) on application by a partner, the entry of an
order by a court of competent jurisdiction dissolving the
partnership on the grounds that it is not reasonably
practicable to carry on the partnership's business or not for
profit activity in conformity with the partnership agreement;
(5) on application by a transferee of a partner's
transferable interest, a judicial determination that it is
equitable to wind up the partnership business or not for
profit activity:
(i) after the expiration of the term or completion
of the undertaking, if the partnership was for a definite term
or particular undertaking at the time of the transfer; or
(ii) at any time, if the partnership was a
partnership at will at the time of the transfer;
(6) the passage of 90 consecutive days during which
the partnership does not have at least two partners, unless
either of the following applies:
(i) The remaining partner agrees in writing within
90 days after the dissociation of the last partner, to
continue the business or not for profit activity of the
partnership and to admit one or more new partners; or
(ii) The business or not for profit activity of the
partnership is continued and one or more new partners are
admitted in the manner stated in the partnership agreement; or
(7) the passage of 90 consecutive days during which
the partnership does not have any remaining partners, unless
either of the following applies:
(i) The holders of all of the transferable interests
in the partnership agree in writing, within 90 days after the
dissociation of the last partner, to continue the business or
not for profit activity of the partnership and to admit two or
more new partners; or
(ii) The business or not for profit activity of the
partnership is continued and two or more new partners are
admitted in the manner stated in the partnership agreement.
§10A-8A-8.02. Effect of dissolution.
Notwithstanding Section 10A-1-9.12:
(a) A dissolved partnership continues its existence
as a partnership but may not carry on any business or not for
profit activity except as is appropriate to wind up and
liquidate its business or not for profit activity, including:
(1) collecting its assets;
(2) disposing of its properties that will not be
distributed in kind to persons owning transferable interests;
(3) discharging or making provisions for discharging
its liabilities;
(4) distributing its remaining property in
accordance with Section 10A-8A-8.09; and
(5) doing every other act necessary to wind up and
liquidate its business or not for profit activity.
(b) In winding up its business or not for profit
activity, a partnership may:
(1) deliver to the Secretary of State for filing a
statement of dissolution setting forth:
(A) The name of the partnership;
(B) If the partnership has filed a statement of
partnership, a statement of not for profit partnership, a
statement of authority, or a statement of limited liability
partnership, the date of filing its statement of partnership,
statement of not for profit partnership, statement of
authority, or statement of limited liability partnership, and
all amendments and restatements thereof, and the office or
offices where filed;
(C) That the partnership has dissolved;
(D) The name, street address, and mailing address of
the partner who will be winding up the business or not for
profit activity of the partnership pursuant to Section
10A-8A-8.03(a), and if none, the name, street address, and
mailing address of the person appointed pursuant to Section
10A-8A-8.03(b) or (c) to wind up the business or not for
profit activity of the partnership;
(E) If the partnership has filed a statement of
partnership, a statement of not for profit partnership, or a
statement of limited liability partnership, the name, street
address, and mailing address of the partnership's registered
agent; and
(F) Any other information the partnership deems
appropriate;
(2) preserve the partnership's business or not for
profit activity as a going concern for a reasonable time;
(3) prosecute, defend, or settle actions or
proceedings whether civil, criminal or administrative;
(4) transfer the partnership's assets;
(5) resolve disputes by mediation or arbitration;
and
(6) merge or convert in accordance with Article 9 of
this chapter or Article 8 of Chapter 1.
(c) The dissolution of a partnership does not:
(1) transfer title to the partnership's property;
(2) prevent the commencement of a proceeding by or
against the partnership in its partnership name;
(3) terminate, abate or suspend a proceeding pending
by or against the partnership on the effective date of
dissolution;
(4) terminate the authority of its registered agent;
or
(5) abate, suspend or otherwise alter the
application of Section 10A-8A-3.06.
(d) A statement of dissolution is a filing
instrument under Chapter 1.
§10A-8A-8.03. Right to wind up business or not for
profit activity.
(a) If a dissolved partnership has a partner or
partners that have not dissociated, that partner or those
partners shall wind up the business or not for profit activity
of the partnership and shall have the powers set forth in
Section 10A-8A-8.04. A person whose dissociation as a partner
resulted in the dissolution of the partnership may participate
in the winding up as if still a partner, unless the
dissociation was wrongful.
(b) If a dissolved partnership does not have a
partner and no person has the right to participate in winding
up under subsection (a), the personal or legal representative
of the last person to have been a partner may wind up the
partnership's business or not for profit activity. If the
representative does not exercise that right, a person to wind
up the partnership's business or not for profit activity may
be appointed by the affirmative vote or consent of transferees
owning a majority of the transferable interests at the time
the consent is to be effective.
(c) A court of competent jurisdiction may order
judicial supervision of the winding up of a dissolved
partnership, including the appointment of a person to wind up
the partnership's business or not for profit activity:
(1) on application of a partner or any person
entitled under the last sentence of subsection (a) to
participate in the winding up of the dissolved partnership, if
the applicant establishes good cause;
(2) on application of a transferee, if the
partnership does not have a partner and within a reasonable
time following the dissolution no person having the authority
to wind up the business or not for profit activity of the
partnership has been appointed pursuant to subsection (b);
(3) on application of a transferee, if the
partnership does not have a partner and within a reasonable
time following the dissolution the person appointed pursuant
to subsection (b) is not winding up the business or not for
profit activity of the partnership; or
(4) in connection with a proceeding under Section
10A-8A-8.01(4) or (5).
(d) A person appointed under subsection (b) or (c)
is not a partner but:
(1) has the powers of a partner under Section
10A-8A-8.04 but is not liable for the debts, liabilities, and
other obligations of the partnership solely by reason of
having or exercising those powers or otherwise acting to wind
up the business or not for profit activity of the dissolved
partnership; and
(2) shall promptly deliver to the Secretary of State
for filing a statement of dissolution setting forth the items
listed in Section 10A-8A-8.02(b)(1) and the following:
(A) that the partnership does not have a partner;
(B) the name, street address, and mailing address of
each person that has been appointed to wind up the business or
not for profit activity of the partnership;
(C) that each person has been appointed pursuant to
subsection (b) or (c), as applicable, to wind up the business
or not for profit activity of the partnership; and
(D) pursuant to this section, that each person has
the powers of a partner under Section 10A-8A-8.04 but is not
liable for the debts, liabilities, and other obligations of
the partnership solely by reason of having or exercising those
powers or otherwise acting to wind up the business or not for
profit activity of the dissolved partnership.
§10A-8A-8.04. Power to bind partnership after
dissolution.
(a) After dissolution, a partnership is bound by the
act of a partner or by the act of a dissociated partner acting
as a partner under Section 10A-8A-8.03(a) which:
(1) is appropriate for winding up the partnership's
business or not for profit activity; or
(2) would have bound the partnership under Section
10A-8A-3.01 before dissolution, if, at the time the other
party enters into the transaction, the other party does not
have notice of the dissolution.
(b) Subject to subsection (a), a person dissociated
as a partner binds a partnership through an act occurring
after dissolution only if:
(1) at the time the other party enters into the
transaction the other party does not have notice of the
dissociation and reasonably believes that the person is a
partner; and
(2) the act:
(A) is appropriate for winding up the partnership's
business or not for profit activity; or
(B) would have bound the partnership under Section
10A-8A-3.01 before dissolution and at the time the other party
enters into the transaction the other party does not have
notice of the dissolution.
§10A-8A-8.05. Liability after dissolution of partner
and person dissociated as partner; other partners, and persons
dissociated as partners.
(a) If a partner having knowledge of the dissolution
causes a partnership to incur an obligation under Section
10A-8A-8.04(a) by an act that is not appropriate for winding
up the partnership's business or not for profit activity, the
partner is liable:
(1) to the partnership for any damage caused to the
partnership arising from the obligation; and
(2) if another partner or a person dissociated as a
partner is liable for the obligation, to that other partner or
person for any damage caused to that other partner or person
arising from the liability.
(b) If a person dissociated as a partner causes a
partnership to incur an obligation under Section
10A-8A-8.04(b), the person is liable:
(1) to the partnership for any damage caused to the
partnership arising from the obligation; and
(2) if a partner or another person dissociated as a
partner is liable for the obligation, to the partner or other
person for any damage caused to the partner or other person
arising from the liability.
(c) A person dissociated as a partner is not liable
under subsection (b) if:
(1) the last sentence of Section 10A-8A-8.03(a)
permits the person to participate in winding up; and
(2) the act that causes the partnership to be bound
under Section 10A-8A-8.04(b) is appropriate for winding up the
partnership's business or not for profit activity.
§10A-8A-8.06. Known claims against dissolved
partnership.
Notwithstanding Sections 10A-1-9.01 and 10A-1-9.21:
(a) A dissolved partnership may dispose of any known
claims against it by following the procedures described in
subsection (b) at any time after the effective date of the
dissolution of the partnership.
(b) A dissolved partnership may give notice of the
dissolution in writing to the holder of any known claim. The
notice must:
(1) identify the dissolved partnership;
(2) describe the information required to be included
in a claim;
(3) provide a mailing address to which the claim is
to be sent;
(4) state the deadline, which may not be fewer than
120 days from the effective date of the notice, by which the
dissolved partnership must receive the claim;
(5) state that if not sooner barred, the claim will
be barred if not received by the deadline; and
(6) unless the partnership has been throughout its
existence a limited liability partnership, state that the
barring of a claim against the partnership will also bar any
corresponding claim against any partner or person dissociated
as a partner which is based on Section 10A-8A-3.06.
(c) Unless sooner barred by any other statute
limiting actions, a claim against a dissolved partnership is
barred:
(1) if a claimant who was given notice under
subsection (b) does not deliver the claim to the dissolved
partnership by the deadline; or
(2) if a claimant whose claim was rejected by the
dissolved partnership, does not commence a proceeding to
enforce the claim within 90 days from the effective date of
the rejection notice.
(d) For purposes of this section, "known claim" or
"claim" includes unliquidated claims, but does not include a
contingent liability that has not matured so that there is no
immediate right to bring suit or a claim based on an event
occurring after the effective date of dissolution.
(e) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
extend any otherwise applicable statute of limitations.
§10A-8A-8.07. Other claims against dissolved
partnership.
Notwithstanding Sections 10A-1-9.01 and 10A-1-9.22:
(a) A dissolved partnership may publish notice of
its dissolution and request that persons with claims against
the dissolved partnership present them in accordance with the
notice.
(b) The notice authorized by subsection (a) must:
(1) be published at least one time in a newspaper of
general circulation in the county in which the dissolved
partnership's principal place of business or not for profit
activity in this state is located, and if none, was last
located;
(2) describe the information that must be included
in a claim and provide a mailing address to which the claim is
to be sent;
(3) state that if not sooner barred, a claim against
the dissolved partnership will be barred unless a proceeding
to enforce the claim is commenced within two years after the
publication of the notice; and
(4) unless the partnership has been throughout its
existence a limited liability partnership, state that the
barring of a claim against the partnership will also bar any
corresponding claim against any partner or person dissociated
as a partner which is based on Section 10A-8A-3.06.
(c) If a dissolved partnership publishes a newspaper
notice in accordance with subsection (b), unless sooner barred
by any other statute limiting actions, the claim of each of
the following claimants is barred unless the claimant
commences a proceeding to enforce the claim against the
dissolved partnership within two years after the publication
date of the newspaper notice:
(1) a claimant who was not given notice under
Section 10A-8A-8.06;
(2) a claimant whose claim was timely sent to the
dissolved partnership but not acted on by the dissolved
partnership; and
(3) a claimant whose claim is contingent at the
effective date of the dissolution of the partnership, or is
based on an event occurring after the effective date of the
dissolution of the partnership.
(d) A claim that is not barred under this section,
any other statute limiting actions, or Section 10A-8A-8.06 may
be enforced:
(1) against a partnership, to the extent of its
undistributed assets;
(2) except as provided in subsection (h), if the
assets of a dissolved partnership have been distributed after
dissolution, against the person or persons owning the
transferable interests to the extent of that person's
proportionate share of the claim or of the assets distributed
to that person after dissolution, whichever is less, but a
person's total liability for all claims under subsection (d)
may not exceed the total amount of assets distributed to that
person after dissolution of the partnership; or
(3) against any person liable on the claim under
Section 10A-8A-3.06, 10A-8A-7.03 and 10A-8A-8.05.
(e) A dissolved partnership that published a notice
under this section may file an application with a court of
competent jurisdiction for a determination of the amount and
form of security to be provided for payment of claims that are
contingent or have not been made known to the dissolved
partnership or that are based on an event occurring after the
effective date of the dissolution of the partnership but that,
based on the facts known to the dissolved partnership, are
reasonably estimated to arise after the effective date of the
dissolution of the partnership. Provision need not be made for
any claim that is or is reasonably anticipated to be barred
under subsection (c).
(f) Within 10 days after the filing of the
application provided for in subsection (e), notice of the
proceeding shall be given by the dissolved partnership to each
potential claimant as described in subsection (e).
(g) The court under subsection (e) may appoint a
guardian ad litem to represent all claimants whose identities
are unknown in any proceeding brought under this section. The
reasonable fees and expenses of the guardian, including all
reasonable expert witness fees, shall be paid by the dissolved
partnership.
(h) Provision by the dissolved partnership for
security in the amount and the form ordered by the court under
subsection (e) shall satisfy the dissolved partnership's
obligation with respect to claims that are contingent, have
not been made known to the dissolved partnership, or are based
on an event occurring after the effective date of the
dissolution of the partnership, and those claims may not be
enforced against a person owning a transferable interest to
whom assets have been distributed by the dissolved partnership
after the effective date of the dissolution of the
partnership.
(i) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
extend any otherwise applicable statute of limitations.
(j) If a claim has been satisfied, disposed of, or
barred under Section 10A-8A-8.06, this section, or other law,
the person or persons designated to wind up the business or
not for profit activity of a partnership, and the owners of
the transferable interests receiving assets from the
partnership, shall not be liable for that claim.
§10A-8A-8.08. Liability of partner and person
dissociated as partner when claim against partnership. If a
claim against a dissolved partnership is barred under Section
10A-8A-8.06 or 10A-8A-8.07, any corresponding claim under
Section 10A-8A-3.06, 10A-8A-7.03 and 10A-8A-8.05 is also
barred.
§10A-8A-8.09. Disposition of assets, when
contributions required.
Notwithstanding Section 10A-1-9.12, upon the winding
up of a partnership, the assets of the partnership, including
any obligation under Section 10A-8A-4.03, 10A-8A-4.04, and
10A-8A-4.09, and any contribution required by this section,
shall be applied as follows:
(a) Payment, or adequate provision for payment,
shall be made to creditors, including, to the extent permitted
by law, partners who are creditors, in satisfaction of
liabilities of the partnership.
(b) After a partnership complies with subsection
(a), any surplus must be distributed:
(1) first, to each person owning a transferable
interest that reflects contributions made on account of the
transferable interest and not previously returned, an amount
equal to the value of the person's unreturned contributions;
and
(2) then to each person owning a transferable
interest in the proportions in which the owners of
transferable interests share in distributions before
dissolution.
(c) If the partnership does not have sufficient
surplus to comply with subsection (b)(1), any surplus must be
distributed among the owners of transferable interests in
proportion to the value of their respective unreturned
contributions.
(d) If a partnership's assets are insufficient to
satisfy all of its obligations under subsection (a), with
respect to each unsatisfied obligation incurred when the
partnership was not a limited liability partnership, the
following rules apply:
(1) Each person that was a partner when the
obligation was incurred and that has not been released from
the obligation under Section 10A-8A-7.03(c) and (d) shall
contribute to the partnership for the purpose of enabling the
partnership to satisfy the obligation. The contribution due
from each of those persons is in proportion to the right to
receive distributions in the capacity of partner in effect for
each of those persons when the obligation was incurred.
(2) If a person does not contribute the full amount
required under paragraph (1) with respect to an unsatisfied
obligation of the partnership, the other persons required to
contribute by paragraph (1) on account of the obligation shall
contribute the additional amount necessary to discharge the
obligation. The additional contribution due from each of those
other persons is in proportion to the right to receive
distributions in the capacity of partner in effect for each of
those other persons when the obligation was incurred.
(3) If a person does not make the additional
contribution required by paragraph (2), further additional
contributions are determined and due in the same manner as
provided in that paragraph.
(e) A person that makes an additional contribution
under subsection (d)(2) or (3) may recover from any person
whose failure to contribute under subsection (d)(1) or (2)
necessitated the additional contribution. A person may not
recover under this subsection more than the amount
additionally contributed. A person's liability under this
subsection may not exceed the amount the person failed to
contribute.
(f) The estate of a deceased individual is liable
for the person's obligations under this section.
(g) An assignee for the benefit of creditors of a
partnership or a partner, or a person appointed by a court to
represent creditors of a partnership or a partner, may enforce
a person's obligation to contribute under subsection (d).
§10A-8A-8.10. Reinstatement after dissolution.
Notwithstanding Sections 10A-1-9.31 and 10A-1-9.32,
a partnership that has been dissolved may be reinstated upon
compliance with the following conditions:
(a) the consent shall have been obtained from the
partners or other persons entitled to consent at the time that
is:
(1) required for reinstatement under the partnership
agreement; or
(2) if the partnership agreement does not state the
consent required for reinstatement, sufficient for dissolution
under the partnership agreement; or
(3) if the partnership agreement neither states the
consent required for reinstatement nor for dissolution,
sufficient for dissolution under this chapter;
(b) in the case of a written objection to
reinstatement having been delivered to the partnership before
or at the time of the consent required by subsection (a) by
the partners or other persons having authority under the
partnership agreement to bring about or prevent dissolution of
the partnership, those partners or persons withdrawing that
written objection effective at the time of the consent
required by subsection (a);
(c) in the case of a partnership dissolved in a
judicial proceeding initiated by one or more of the partners
pursuant to Section 10A-8A-8.01(4), the consent of each of
those partners shall have been obtained and shall be included
in the consent required by subsection (a);
(d) in the case of a partnership dissolved in a
judicial proceeding initiated by one or more of transferees
pursuant to Section 10A-8A-8.01(5), the consent of each of
those transferees shall have been obtained and shall be
included in the consent required by subsection (a); and
(e) in the case of a partnership that has filed a
statement of dissolution, the filing of a certificate of
reinstatement in accordance with Section 10A-8A-8.11.
§10A-8A-8.11. Certificate of reinstatement.
A partnership that has dissolved, has filed a
statement of dissolution, and is seeking to reinstate in
accordance with Section 10A-8A-8.10, shall deliver to the
Secretary of State for filing a certificate of reinstatement
in accordance with the following:
(a) A certificate of reinstatement shall be
delivered to the Secretary of State for filing. The
certificate of reinstatement shall state:
(1) the name of the partnership before
reinstatement;
(2) the name of the partnership following
reinstatement, which partnership name shall comply with
Section 10A-8A-8.12;
(3) the date of formation of the partnership;
(4) the date of filing its statement of dissolution,
and all amendments and restatements thereof, and the office or
offices where filed;
(5) if the partnership has filed a statement of
partnership, a statement of not for profit partnership, a
statement of authority, or a statement of limited liability
partnership, the date of filing its statement of partnership,
statement of not for profit partnership, statement of
authority, or statement of limited liability partnership, and
all amendments and restatements thereof, and the office or
offices where filed;
(6) the date of dissolution of the partnership, if
known;
(7) a statement that all applicable conditions of
Section 10A-8A-8.10 have been satisfied; and
(8) the address of the registered office and the
name of the registered agent at that address in compliance
with Article 5 of Chapter 1.
(b) A partnership shall deliver to the Secretary of
State for filing a statement of dissolution prior to or
simultaneously with the certificate of reinstatement. If a
partnership has not filed a statement of partnership, a
statement of not for profit partnership, or a statement of
limited liability partnership prior to filing its statement of
dissolution, the partnership must also deliver to the
Secretary of State for filing a statement of partnership, a
statement of not for profit partnership, or a statement of
limited liability partnership, simultaneously with the
certificate of reinstatement.
(c) A certificate of reinstatement is a filing
instrument under Chapter 1.
§10A-8A-8.12. Partnership name upon reinstatement.
The name of a partnership following the filing of a
certificate of reinstatement shall be determined as follows:
(a) if the partnership is listed in the Secretary of
State's records as a partnership that has been dissolved, then
the name of a partnership following reinstatement shall be
that partnership name at the time of reinstatement if that
partnership name complies with Article 5 of Chapter 1 at the
time of reinstatement; and
(b) if that partnership name does not comply with
Article 5 of Chapter 1, the name of the partnership following
reinstatement shall be that partnership name followed by the
word "reinstated."
§10A-8A-8.13. Effect of reinstatement.
(a) Subject to subsection (b), upon reinstatement,
the partnership shall be deemed for all purposes to have
continued its business or not for profit activity as if
dissolution had never occurred; and each right inuring to, and
each debt, obligation, and liability incurred by, the
partnership after the dissolution shall be determined as if
the dissolution had never occurred.
(b) The rights of persons acting in reliance on the
dissolution before those persons had notice of the
reinstatement shall not be adversely affected by the
reinstatement.
Article 9. Conversions and Mergers.
§10A-8A-9.01. Definitions.
Notwithstanding Section 10A-1-1.03, as used in this
article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
terms mean:
(1) "Constituent partnership" means a constituent
organization that is a partnership.
(2) "Constituent organization" means an organization
that is party to a merger under this article.
(3) "Converted organization" means the organization
into which a converting organization converts pursuant to this
article.
(4) "Converting partnership" means a converting
organization that is a partnership.
(5) "Converting organization" means an organization
that converts into another organization pursuant to this
article.
(6) "Governing statute" of an organization means the
statute that governs the organization's internal affairs.
(7) "Organization" means a partnership, including a
limited liability partnership; limited partnership, including
a limited liability limited partnership; limited liability
company; business trust; corporation; nonprofit corporation;
professional corporation; or any other person having a
governing statute. The term includes domestic and foreign
organizations whether or not organized for profit.
(8) "Organizational documents" means:
(A) (i) for a partnership, its partnership agreement
and, if applicable, its statement of partnership, statement of
not for profit partnership, or statement of limited liability
partnership; (ii) for a foreign partnership, its partnership
agreement and, if applicable, its statement of foreign limited
liability partnership;
(B) for a limited partnership or foreign limited
partnership, its certificate of formation and partnership
agreement, or comparable writings as provided in its governing
statute;
(C) for a limited liability company or foreign
limited liability company, its certificate of formation and
limited liability company agreement, or comparable writings as
provided in its governing statute;
(D) for a business or statutory trust or foreign
business or statutory trust its agreement of trust and
declaration of trust, or comparable writings as provided in
its governing statute;
(E) for a corporation for profit or foreign
corporation for profit, its certificate of formation, bylaws,
and other agreements among its shareholders that are
authorized by its governing statute, or comparable writings as
provided in its governing statute;
(F) for a nonprofit corporation or foreign nonprofit
corporation, its certificate of formation, bylaws, and other
agreements that are authorized by its governing statute, or
comparable writings as provided in its governing statute;
(G) for a professional corporation or foreign
professional corporation, its certificate of formation,
bylaws, and other agreements among its shareholders that are
authorized by its governing statute, or comparable writings as
provided in its governing statute; and
(H) for any other organization, the basic writings
that create the organization and determine its internal
governance and the relations among the persons that own it,
have an interest in it, or are members of it.
(9) "Surviving organization" means an organization
into which one or more other organizations are merged under
this article, whether the organization pre-existed the merger
or was created pursuant to the merger.
§10A-8A-9.02. Conversion.
(a) An organization other than a partnership may
convert to a partnership, and a partnership may convert to an
organization other than a partnership pursuant to this
section, Sections 10A-8A-9.03 through 10A-8A-9.05, and a plan
of conversion, if:
(1) the governing statute of the organization that
is not a partnership authorizes the conversion;
(2) the law of the jurisdiction governing the
converting organization and the converted organization does
not prohibit the conversion; and
(3) the converting organization and the converted
organization each comply with the governing statute and
organizational documents applicable to that organization in
effecting the conversion.
(b) A plan of conversion must be in writing and must
include:
(1) the name, type of organization, and mailing
address of the principal office of the converting organization
before conversion;
(2) the name, type of organization, and mailing
address of the principal office of the converted organization
after conversion;
(3) the terms and conditions of the conversion,
including the manner and basis for converting interests in the
converting organization into any combination of money,
interests in the converted organization, and other
consideration allowed in Section 10A-8A-9.02(c); and
(4) the organizational documents of the converted
organization.
(c) In connection with a conversion, rights or
securities of or interests in the converting organization may
be exchanged for or converted into cash, property, or rights
or securities of or interests in the converted organization,
or, in addition to or in lieu thereof, may be exchanged for or
converted into cash, property, or rights or securities of or
interests in another organization or may be cancelled.
(d) If a partnership is the converting organization
and that partnership does not have an effective statement of
partnership, statement of not for profit partnership, or
statement of limited liability partnership on file with the
Secretary of State, then that partnership must, before
proceeding with a conversion deliver to the Secretary of State
for filing, a statement of partnership, statement of not for
profit partnership, or statement of limited liability
partnership simultaneously with the delivery to the Secretary
of State for filing, of a statement of conversion.
(e) If an organization is converting to a
partnership, the converting organization must deliver to the
Secretary of State for filing a statement of partnership,
statement of not for profit partnership, or a statement of
limited liability partnership in accordance with Section
10A-8A-9.04.
§10A-8A-9.03. Action on plan of conversion by
converting partnership.
(a) Subject to Section 10A-8A-9.10, a plan of
conversion must be consented to by all the partners of a
converting partnership.
(b) Subject to Section 10A-8A-9.10 and any
contractual rights, after a conversion is approved, and at any
time before a filing is made under Section 10A-8A-9.04, a
converting partnership may amend the plan or abandon the
planned conversion:
(1) as provided in the plan; and
(2) except as prohibited by the plan, by the same
consent as was required to approve the plan.
§10A-8A-9.04. Filings required for conversion;
effective date.
(a) After a plan of conversion is approved:
(1) if the converting organization is an
organization formed under, or its internal affairs are
governed by, the laws of this state, the converting
organization shall file a statement of conversion in
accordance with subsection (c), which statement of conversion
must be signed in accordance with Section 10A-8A-2.03 and
which must include:
(A) the name of the converting organization;
(B) the date of the filing of the certificate of
formation of the converting organization, if any, and all
prior amendments and the filing office or offices, if any,
where such is filed;
(C) a statement that the converting organization has
been converted into the converted organization;
(D) the name and type of organization of the
converted organization and the jurisdiction of its governing
statute;
(E) the street and mailing address of the principal
office of the converted organization;
(F) the date the conversion is effective under the
governing statute of the converted organization;
(G) a statement that the conversion was approved as
required by this chapter;
(H) a statement that the conversion was approved as
required by the governing statute of the converted
organization; and
(I) if the converted organization is a foreign
organization not authorized to conduct business or not for
profit activity in this state, the street and mailing address
of an office for the purposes of Section 10A-8A-9.05(b); and
(2) if the converted organization is a partnership,
the converting organization shall deliver to the Secretary of
State for filing a statement of partnership, statement of not
for profit partnership, or statement of limited liability
partnership, as applicable, which statement of partnership,
statement of not for profit partnership, or statement of
limited liability partnership must include, in addition to the
information required by Section10A-8A-2.02 or Section
10A-8A-10.01, as applicable:
(A) a statement that the partnership was converted
from the converting organization;
(B) the name and type of organization of the
converting organization and the jurisdiction of the converting
organization's governing statute; and
(C) a statement that the conversion was approved in
a manner that complied with the converting organization's
governing statute.
(3) if the converting organization is a partnership
and that partnership does not have an effective statement of
partnership, statement of not for profit partnership, or
statement of limited liability partnership on file with the
Secretary of State, then the converting organization must
deliver to the Secretary of State for filing, a statement of
partnership, statement of not for profit partnership, or
statement of limited liability partnership simultaneously with
the delivery to the Secretary of State for filing, of a
statement of conversion.
(b) A conversion becomes effective:
(1) if the converted organization is a partnership,
when the statement of partnership, statement of not for profit
partnership, or statement of limited liability partnership
takes effect; and
(2) if the converted organization is not a
partnership, as provided by the governing statute of the
converted organization.
(c) If the converting organization is an
organization formed under, or its internal affairs are
governed by, the laws of this state, then the converting
organization shall file the statement of conversion required
under subsection (a)(1) and the statement, if any, required
under subsection (a)(3) with the Secretary of State in
accordance with Section 10A-1-4.02(c)(1).
(d) If the converted organization is a partnership,
then, notwithstanding Section 10A-1-4.02(b), the converting
organization shall file a statement of partnership, statement
of not for profit partnership, or statement of limited
liability partnership required under subsection (a)(2) with
the Secretary of State in accordance with Section
10A-1-4.02(c)(5), along with the fees specified in Section
10A-1-4.31 subject to subsections (f)(3) and (f)(4).
(e) If the converting organization is required to
file a statement of conversion and a statement of partnership,
statement of not for profit partnership, or statement of
limited liability partnership with the Secretary of State,
then the converting organization shall file the statement of
conversion and the statement of partnership, statement of not
for profit partnership, or statement of limited liability
partnership with the Secretary of State simultaneously.
(f) In the case of a statement of conversion that is
to be filed with the Secretary of State pursuant to subsection
(c):
(1) if the converting organization has a certificate
of formation filed with the judge of probate, the Secretary of
State shall within 10 days transmit a certified copy of the
statement of conversion to the office of the judge of probate
in the county in which the certificate of formation for such
converting organization was filed along with the proper fee
for the judge of probate.
(2) if the converting organization did not file its
certificate of formation with the judge of probate, but rather
in accordance with this title filed its certificate of
formation with the Secretary of State, the Secretary of State
shall not transmit a certified copy of the statement of
conversion to the office of the judge of probate and shall not
collect any fee for the judge of probate.
(3) if the converting organization is, immediately
prior to the conversion becoming effective, an organization
described in Section 10A-1-4.02(c)(4), but is not required
under this title to file its organizational documents with the
judge of probate, the Secretary of State shall not transmit a
certified copy of the statement of conversion to the office of
the judge of probate and shall not collect any fee for the
judge of probate.
(4) if the converting organization is a partnership,
the Secretary of State shall not transmit a certified copy of
the statement of conversion to the office of the judge of
probate and shall not collect any fee for the judge of
probate.
(g) In the case of a statement of partnership,
statement of not for profit partnership, or statement of
limited liability partnership that is to be filed with the
Secretary of State pursuant to subsection (d), the Secretary
of State shall not transmit a certified copy of the statement
of partnership, statement of not for profit partnership, or
statement of limited liability partnership to the office of
the judge of probate and shall not collect any fee for the
judge of probate, but shall collect the fee provided for the
Secretary of State in Section 10A-1-4.31(a)(1).
(h) After a conversion becomes effective, if the
converted organization is a partnership, then all filing
instruments required to be filed under this title regarding
that converted organization shall be filed with the Secretary
of State.
(i) If:
(1) the converting organization is a filing entity,
a partnership with an effective statement of partnership,
statement of not for profit partnership, or statement of
limited liability partnership on file with the Secretary of
State, a foreign filing entity registered to conduct business
or not for profit activity in this state or a qualified
foreign limited liability partnership;
(2) the converted organization will be a filing
entity, a partnership with an effective statement of
partnership, statement of not for profit partnership, or
statement of limited liability partnership on file with the
Secretary of State, a foreign filing entity registered to
conduct business or not for profit activity in this state or a
qualified foreign limited liability partnership;
(3) the name of the converting organization and the
converted organization are to be the same, other than words,
phrases or abbreviations indicating the type of entity; and
(4) the name of the converted organization complies
with Division A of Article 5 of Chapter 1 or Section
10A-1-7.07, as the case may be; then notwithstanding Division
B of Article 5 of Chapter 1, no name reservation shall be
required and the converted organization shall for all purposes
of this title be entitled to utilize the name of the
converting organization without any further action by the
converting organization or the converted organization.
(j) A certified copy of any document required to be
filed under this section may be filed in the real estate
records in the office of the judge of probate in any county in
which the converting organization owned real property, without
payment and without collection by the judge of probate of any
deed or other transfer tax or fee. The judge of probate shall,
however, be entitled to collect a filing fee of five dollars
($5). Any such filing shall evidence chain of title, but lack
of filing shall not affect the converted organization's title
to such real property.
(k) A statement of conversion is a filing instrument
under Chapter 1.
(l) Except as set forth in subsections (f)(2),
(f)(3), and (f)(4), the filing fees for a statement of
conversion shall be the same fee as provided in Section
10A-1-4.31(a)(5).
§10A-8A-9.05. Effect of conversion.
(a) When a conversion takes effect:
(1) all property owned by the converting
organization remains vested in the converted organization
without reservation or impairment and the title to any
property vested by deed or otherwise in the converting
organization shall not revert or be in any way impaired by
reason of the conversion;
(2) all debts, obligations, or other liabilities of
the converting organization continue as debts, obligations, or
other liabilities of the converted organization and neither
the rights of creditors, nor the liens upon the property of
the converting organization shall be impaired by the
conversion;
(3) an action or proceeding pending by or against
the converting organization continues as if the conversion had
not occurred;
(4) except as prohibited by law other than this
chapter, all of the rights, privileges, immunities, powers,
and purposes of the converting organization remain vested in
the converted organization;
(5) except as otherwise provided in the plan of
conversion, the terms and conditions of the plan of conversion
take effect;
(6) except as otherwise agreed, for all purposes of
the laws of this state, the converting organization shall not
be required to wind up its business or not for profit activity
or pay its liabilities and distribute its assets, and the
conversion shall not be deemed to constitute a dissolution of
the converting organization;
(7) for all purposes of the laws of this state, the
rights, privileges, powers, interests in property, debts,
liabilities and duties of the converting organization, shall
be the rights, privileges, powers, interests in property,
debts, liabilities and duties of the converted organization,
and shall not be deemed as a consequence of the conversion, to
have been transferred to the converted organization;
(8) if the converted organization is a partnership,
for all purposes of the laws of this state, the partnership
shall be deemed to be the same organization as the converting
organization, and the conversion shall constitute a
continuation of the existence of the converting organization
in the form of a partnership;
(9) if the converted organization is a partnership,
the existence of the partnership shall be deemed to have
commenced on the date the converting organization commenced
its existence in the jurisdiction in which the converting
organization was first created, formed, organized,
incorporated, or otherwise came into being;
(10) the conversion shall not affect the choice of
law applicable to matters arising prior to conversion; and
(11) If the Secretary of State has assigned a unique
identifying number or other designation to the converting
organization and
(i) the converted organization is formed pursuant
to, or governed by, the laws of this state or
(ii) the converted organization is, within 30 days
after the effective date of the conversion, registered to
transact business in this state, then that unique identifying
number or other designation shall continue to be assigned to
the converted organization.
(b) A converted organization that is a foreign
entity consents to the jurisdiction of the courts of this
state to enforce any debt, obligation or other liability for
which the converting partnership is liable if, before the
conversion, the converting partnership was subject to suit in
this state on the debt, obligation or other liability. If a
converted organization that is a foreign entity fails to
designate or maintain a registered agent, or the designated
registered agent cannot with reasonable diligence be served,
then service of process on that converted organization for the
purposes of enforcing a debt, obligation, or other liability
under this subsection may be made in the same manner and has
the same consequences as provided in Section 10A-1-5.35.
§10A-8A-9.06. Merger.
(a) A partnership may merge with one or more other
constituent organizations pursuant to this section, Sections
10A-8A-9.07 through 10A-8A-9.09, and a plan of merger, if:
(1) the governing statute of each of the other
organizations authorizes the merger;
(2) the merger is not prohibited by the law of a
jurisdiction that enacted any of those governing statutes; and
(3) each of the other organizations complies with
its governing statute in effecting the merger.
(b) A plan of merger must be in writing and must
include:
(1) the name, type of organization, and mailing
address of the principal office of each constituent
organization;
(2) the name, type of organization, and mailing
address of the principal office of the surviving organization
and, if the surviving organization is to be created pursuant
to the merger, a statement to that effect;
(3) the terms and conditions of the merger,
including the manner and basis for converting the interests in
each constituent organization into any combination of money,
interests in the surviving organization, and other
consideration as allowed by subsection (c);
(4) if the surviving organization is to be created
pursuant to the merger, the surviving organization's
organizational documents; and
(5) if the surviving organization is not to be
created pursuant to the merger, any amendments to be made by
the merger to the surviving organization's organizational
documents.
(c) In connection with a merger, rights or
securities of or interests in a constituent organization may
be exchanged for or converted into cash, property, or rights
or securities of or interests in the surviving organization,
or, in addition to or in lieu thereof, may be exchanged for or
converted into cash, property, or rights or securities of or
interests in another organization or may be cancelled.
§10A-8A-9.07. Action on plan of merger by
constituent partnership.
(a) Subject to Section 10A-8A-9.10, a plan of merger
must be consented to by all the partners of a constituent
partnership.
(b) Subject to Section 10A-8A-9.10 and any
contractual rights, after a merger is approved, and at any
time before a filing is made under Section 10A-8A-9.08, a
constituent partnership may amend the plan or abandon the
merger:
(1) as provided in the plan; and
(2) except as prohibited by the plan, with the same
consent as was required to approve the plan.
§10A-8A-9.08. Filings required for merger; effective
date.
(a) After each constituent organization has approved
the plan of merger, a statement of merger must be signed on
behalf of:
(1) each constituent partnership, as provided in
Section 10A-8A-2.03(a); and
(2) each other constituent organization, as provided
by its governing statute.
(b) A statement of merger under this section must
include:
(1) the name, type of organization, and mailing
address of the principal office of each constituent
organization and the jurisdiction of its governing statute;
(2) the name, type of organization, and mailing
address of the principal office of the surviving organization,
the jurisdiction of its governing statute, and, if the
surviving organization is created pursuant to the merger, a
statement to that effect;
(3) the date of the filing of the certificate of
formation, if any, and all prior amendments and the filing
office or offices, if any, and where such is filed of each
constituent organization which was formed under the laws of
this state;
(4) the date of the filing of the statement of
partnership, statement of not for profit partnership, or
statement of limited liability partnership, if any, and all
prior amendments and the filing office or offices, if any, and
where such is filed of each constituent organization which is
a partnership;
(5) the date the merger is effective under the
governing statute of the surviving organization;
(6) if the surviving organization is to be created
pursuant to the merger:
(A) if it will be a partnership, the partnership's
statement of partnership, statement of not for profit
partnership, or statement of limited liability partnership; or
(B) if it will be an organization other than a
partnership, any organizational document that creates the
organization that is required to be in a public writing;
(7) if the surviving organization exists before the
merger, any amendments provided for in the plan of merger for
the organizational document that are required to be in a
public writing;
(8) a statement as to each constituent organization
that the merger was approved as required by the organization's
governing statute;
(9) if the surviving organization is a foreign
organization not authorized to conduct business or not for
profit activity in this state, the street and mailing address
of an office for the purposes of Section 10A-8A-9.09(b); and
(10) any additional information required by the
governing statute of any constituent organization.
(c) Prior to the statement of merger being delivered
for filing to the Secretary of State in accordance subsection
(d), all constituent organizations that are partnerships,
other than a partnership that is created pursuant to the
merger, must have on file with the Secretary of State a
statement of partnership, statement of not for profit
partnership, or statement of limited liability partnership.
(d) The statement of merger shall be delivered for
filing to the Secretary of State in accordance with Section
10A-1-4.02(c)(1), along with the fees specified in Section
10A-1-4.31, subject to the last two sentences of this
subsection. For each constituent organization which is formed
under the laws of this state pursuant to a certificate of
formation and which is not, immediately prior to the merger
becoming effective, an organization described in Section
10A-1-4.02(c)(4), the Secretary of State shall within 10 days
transmit a certified copy of the statement of merger to the
office of the judge of probate in the county in which the
certificate of formation for each such constituent
organization was filed along with the proper fee for the judge
of probate. For each constituent organization which is formed
under the laws of this state pursuant to a certificate of
formation, which is, immediately prior to the merger becoming
effective, an organization described in Section
10A-1-4.02(c)(4), but which has a certificate of formation
filed with the judge of probate, the Secretary of State shall
transmit a certified copy of the statement of merger to the
office of the judge of probate in the county in which the
certificate of formation for each such constituent
organization was filed along with the proper fee for the judge
of probate. For each constituent organization which (1) is
formed under the laws of this state pursuant to a certificate
of formation, (2) is, immediately prior to the merger becoming
effective, an organization described in Section
10A-1-4.02(c)(4), and (3) did not file its certificate of
formation with the judge of probate, but rather in accordance
with this title filed its certificate of formation with the
Secretary of State, the Secretary of State shall not transmit
a certified copy of the statement of merger to the office of
the judge of probate and shall not collect any fee for the
judge of probate. For each constituent organization which is a
partnership, the Secretary of State shall not transmit a
certified copy of the statement of merger to the office of the
judge of probate and shall not collect any fee for the judge
of probate.
(e) A merger becomes effective under this article:
(1) if the surviving organization is a partnership,
upon the later of:
(A) the filing of the statement of merger with the
Secretary of State; or
(B) as specified in the statement of merger; or
(2) if the surviving organization is not a
partnership, as provided by the governing statute of the
surviving organization.
(f) After a merger becomes effective, if the
surviving organization is a partnership, then all filing
instruments required to be filed under this title regarding
that surviving organization shall be filed with the Secretary
of State.
(g) A certified copy of the statement of merger
required to be filed under this section may be filed in the
real estate records in the office of the judge of probate in
any county in which any constituent organization owned real
property, without payment and without collection by the judge
of probate of any deed or other transfer tax or fee. The judge
of probate, however, shall be entitled to collect the filing
fee of five dollars ($5). Any such filing shall evidence chain
of title, but lack of filing shall not affect the surviving
organization's title to such real property.
(h) A statement of merger is a filing instrument
under Chapter 1.
(i) Except as provided in the last two sentences of
subsection (d), the filing fees for a statement of merger
shall be the same fees as provided in Section
10A-1-4.31(a)(5).
§10A-8A-9.09. Effect of merger.
(a) When a merger becomes effective:
(1) the surviving organization continues or, in the
case of a surviving organization created pursuant to the
merger, comes into existence;
(2) each constituent organization that merges into
the surviving organization ceases to exist as a separate
entity;
(3) all property owned by each constituent
organization that ceases to exist vests in the surviving
organization without reservation or impairment and the title
to any property vested by deed or otherwise in the surviving
organization shall not revert or be in any way impaired by
reason of the merger;
(4) all debts, obligations or other liabilities of
each constituent organization that ceases to exist continue as
debts, obligations or other liabilities of the surviving
organization and neither the rights of creditors, nor any
liens upon the property of any constituent organization, shall
be impaired by the merger;
(5) an action or proceeding pending by or against
any constituent organization continues as if the merger had
not occurred;
(6) except as prohibited by law other than this
chapter, all of the rights, privileges, immunities, powers,
and purposes of each constituent organization vest in the
surviving organization;
(7) except as otherwise provided in the plan of
merger, the terms and conditions of the plan of merger take
effect;
(8) except as otherwise agreed, if a constituent
partnership ceases to exist, the merger does not dissolve the
partnership;
(9) if the surviving organization is created
pursuant to the merger:
(A) if it is a partnership, the statement of
partnership, statement of not for profit partnership or
statement of limited liability partnership becomes effective;
or
(B) if it is an organization other than a
partnership, the organizational document that creates the
organization becomes effective; and
(10) if the surviving organization existed before
the merger, any amendments provided for in the statement of
merger for the organizational document of that organization
become effective.
(b) A surviving organization that is a foreign
entity consents to the jurisdiction of this state to enforce
any debt, obligation, or other liability owed by a constituent
organization, if before the merger the constituent
organization was subject to suit in this state on the debt,
obligation, or other liability. If a surviving organization
that is a foreign entity fails to designate or maintain a
registered agent, or the designated registered agent cannot
with reasonable diligence be served, then the service of
process on that surviving organization for the purposes of
enforcing a debt, obligation, or other liability under this
subsection may be made in the same manner and has the same
consequences as provided in Section 10A-1-5.35.
§10A-8A-9.10. Restrictions on approval of mergers,
conversions and on relinquishing LLP status.
(a) If a partner of a converting or constituent
partnership will have personal liability with respect to a
converted or surviving organization, approval and amendment of
a plan of conversion or plan of merger are ineffective without
that partner's consent to the plan.
(b) A statement of cancellation of the statement of
limited liability partnership filed in connection with a
conversion or merger is ineffective without each partner's
written consent to such amendment.
(c) A partner does not give the consent required by
subsection (a) or (b) merely by consenting to a provision of
the partnership agreement that permits the partnership
agreement to be amended with the consent of fewer than all the
partners.
§10A-8A-9.11. Liability of partner after conversion
or merger.
(a) A conversion or merger under this article does
not discharge any liability under Sections 10A-8A-3.06,
10A-8A-7.02, or 10A-8A-7.03 of a person that was a partner in
or dissociated as a partner from a converting or constituent
partnership, but:
(1) the provisions of this chapter pertaining to the
collection or discharge of the liability continue to apply to
the liability;
(2) for the purposes of applying those provisions,
the converted or surviving organization is deemed to be the
converting or constituent partnership; and
(3) if a person is required to pay any amount under
this subsection:
(A) the person has a right of contribution from each
other person that was liable as a partner under Section
10A-8A-3.06 when the obligation was incurred and has not been
released from the obligation under Sections 10A-8A-7.02 or
10A-8A-7.03; and
(B) the contribution due from each of those persons
is in proportion to the right to receive distributions in the
capacity of partner in effect for each of those persons when
the obligation was incurred.
(b) In addition to any other liability provided by
law:
(1) a person that immediately before a conversion or
merger became effective was a partner in a converting or
constituent partnership that was not a limited liability
partnership is personally liable for each obligation of the
converted or surviving organization arising from a transaction
with a third party after the conversion or merger becomes
effective, if, at the time the third party enters into the
transaction, the third party:
(A) does not have notice of the conversion or
merger; and
(B) reasonably believes that:
(i) the converted or surviving business is the
converting or constituent partnership;
(ii) the converting or constituent partnership is
not a limited liability partnership; and
(iii) the person is a partner in the converting or
constituent partnership; and
(2) a person that was dissociated as a partner from
a converting or constituent partnership before the conversion
or merger became effective is personally liable for each
obligation of the converted or surviving organization arising
from a transaction with a third party after the conversion or
merger becomes effective, if:
(A) immediately before the conversion or merger
became effective the converting or surviving partnership was
not a limited liability partnership; and
(B) at the time the third party enters into the
transaction the third party:
(i) does not have notice of the dissociation;
(ii) does not have notice of the conversion or
merger; and
(iii) reasonably believes that the converted or
surviving organization is the converting or constituent
partnership, the converting or constituent partnership is not
a limited liability partnership, and the person is a partner
in the converting or constituent partnership.
§10A-8A-9.12. Power of partners and persons
dissociated as partners to bind organization after conversion
or merger.
(a) An act of a person that immediately before a
conversion or merger became effective was a partner in a
converting or constituent partnership binds the converted or
surviving organization after the conversion or merger becomes
effective, if:
(1) before the conversion or merger became
effective, the act would have bound the converting or
constituent partnership under Section 10A-8A-3.01; and
(2) at the time the third party enters into the
transaction, the third party:
(A) does not have notice of the conversion or
merger; and
(B) reasonably believes that the converted or
surviving organization is the converting or constituent
partnership and that the person is a partner in the converting
or constituent partnership.
(b) An act of a person that before a conversion or
merger became effective was dissociated as a partner from a
converting or constituent partnership binds the converted or
surviving organization after the conversion or merger becomes
effective, if:
(1) before the conversion or merger became
effective, the act would have bound the converting or
constituent partnership under Section 10A-8A-3.01 if the
person had been a partner; and
(2) at the time the third party enters into the
transaction, the third party:
(A) does not have notice of the dissociation;
(B) does not have notice of the conversion or
merger; and
(C) reasonably believes that the converted or
surviving organization is the converting or constituent
partnership and that the person is a partner in the converting
or constituent partnership.
(c) If a person having knowledge of the conversion
or merger causes a converted or surviving organization to
incur an obligation under subsection (a) or (b), the person is
liable:
(1) to the converted or surviving organization for
any damage caused to the organization arising from the
obligation; and
(2) if another person is liable for the obligation,
to that other person for any damage caused to that other
person arising from the liability.
§10A-8A-9.13. Article not exclusive. This article is
not exclusive. This article does not preclude an entity from
being converted or merged under law other than this chapter.
Article 10. Limited Liability Partnership.
§10A-8A-10.01. Limited liability partnerships;
statements; cancellations.
(a) A partnership may be formed as, or may become, a
limited liability partnership pursuant to this section.
(b) In order to form a limited liability
partnership, the original partnership agreement of the
partnership shall state that the partnership is formed as a
limited liability partnership, and the partnership shall
deliver to the Secretary of State for filing a statement of
limited liability partnership in accordance with subsection
(d) of this section.
(c) In order for an existing partnership to become a
limited liability partnership, the terms and conditions on
which the partnership becomes a limited liability partnership
must be approved by the affirmative approval necessary to
amend the partnership agreement and, in the case of a
partnership agreement that expressly considers obligations to
contribute to the partnership, also the affirmative approval
necessary to amend those provisions, and after such approval,
the partnership shall deliver to the Secretary of State for
filing a statement of limited liability partnership in
accordance with subsection (d).
(d) A statement of limited liability partnership
must contain all of the following:
(1) the name of the limited liability partnership
which must comply with Article 5 of Chapter 1;
(2) the street, and mailing, if different, address
of its principal office.
(3) the street and mailing address of a registered
office and the name of the registered agent at that office for
service of process in this state which the partnership shall
be required to maintain;
(4) a statement that the partnership was formed as a
limited liability partnership in accordance with subsection
(b) or a statement that the statement of limited liability
partnership was approved in accordance with subsection (c);
and
(5) a statement that the partnership is a limited
liability partnership.
(e) A statement of limited liability partnership may
be amended or restated from time to time in accordance with
Section 10A-1-4.26.
(f) The statement of limited liability partnership
shall be executed by one or more partners authorized to
execute the statement of limited liability partnership.
(g) The statement of limited liability partnership
shall be accompanied by a fee for the Secretary of State in
the respective amounts prescribed by Section 10A-1-4.31.
(h) The Secretary of State shall file the statement
of limited liability partnership of any partnership as a
limited liability partnership that submits a completed
statement of limited liability partnership with the required
fees. The filing by the Secretary of State of a statement of
limited liability partnership is conclusive evidence that the
partnership has satisfied all conditions required to be a
limited liability partnership.
(i) The statement of limited liability partnership
is effective, and a partnership becomes a limited liability
partnership, immediately on the date the statement of limited
liability partnership is filed with the Secretary of State or
at any later date or time specified in the statement of
limited liability partnership in compliance with Article 4 of
Chapter 1. The status as a limited liability partnership
remains effective, regardless of changes in the partnership,
and partnership continues as a limited liability partnership
until a statement of cancellation is voluntarily filed in
accordance with subsection (m).
(j) The fact that a statement of limited liability
partnership is on file with the Secretary of State is notice
that the partnership is a limited liability partnership and as
notice of the facts required to be set forth in the statement
of limited liability partnership.
(k) A partnership that has filed a statement of
limited liability partnership as a limited liability
partnership is for all purposes, except as provided in Section
10A-8-3.06, the same entity that existed before the statement
of limited liability partnership was filed and continues to be
a partnership under the laws of this state subject to the
limited liability partnership provisions of this chapter. If a
limited liability partnership dissolves and its business or
not for profit activity, or a portion of its business or not
for profit activity is continued without the complete winding
up of partnership's business or not for profit activity, a
partnership which is a successor to the limited liability
partnership shall not be required to file a new statement of
limited liability partnership.
(l) The status of the partnership as a limited
liability partnership and the liability of a partner of the
limited liability partnership shall not be adversely affected
by error or subsequent changes in the information stated in
the statement of limited liability partnership under
subsection (d).
(m) The decision to file a statement of cancellation
shall require the approval of all of the partners of the
partnership. The statement of cancellation must be delivered
for filing to the Secretary of State and must contain the
following:
(1) the name of the limited liability partnership;
(2) the date and office or offices in which it filed
its statement of limited liability partnership, and all
amendments and restatements thereof;
(3) the street and mailing address of its principal
office;
(4) the street and mailing address of its registered
office and the name of the registered agent at that office for
service of process in this state which the partnership was
required to maintain;
(5) a statement that the statement of cancellation
was approved in accordance with this subsection; and
(6) any other information that the partners
determine to include.
(n) A statement of cancellation must executed by one
or more partners authorized to execute the statement of
cancellation.
(o) The statement of cancellation is effective, and
a partnership ceases to be a limited liability partnership,
immediately on the date the statement of cancellation is
delivered to the Secretary of State for filing or at any later
date or time specified in the statement of cancellation in
compliance with Article 4 of Chapter 1. The statement of
cancellation shall not cause the dissolution of the
partnership.
(p) The filing of a statement of cancellation of a
limited liability partnership does not affect the limited
liability of partners for debts, obligations or liabilities of
the partnership which occur or were incurred prior to the
filing of the statement of cancellation.
(q) A dissolved limited liability partnership shall
continue its status as a limited liability partnership unless
a statement of cancellation is voluntarily filed in accordance
with subsection (m).
(r) The statement of limited liability partnership
and the statement of cancellation are filing instruments for
the purposes of Chapter 1.
§10A-8A-10.02. Special rules for limited liability
partnerships performing professional services.
(a) A limited liability partnership shall have the
power to render professional services if it complies with the
rules of the licensing authority for such profession.
(b) Every individual who renders professional
services as a partner or as an employee of a limited liability
partnership shall be liable for any negligent or wrongful act
or omission in which the individual personally participates to
the same extent the individual would be liable if the
individual rendered the services as a sole practitioner.
(c) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b),
the personal liability of a partner of any limited liability
partnership engaged in providing professional services shall
be governed by Section 10A-8A-3.06.
(d) The personal liability of a partner or employee
of a foreign limited liability partnership engaged in
providing professional services shall be determined under the
law of the jurisdiction which governs the foreign limited
liability partnership.
(e) Nothing in this article shall restrict or limit
in any manner the authority or duty of a licensing authority
with respect to individuals rendering a professional service
within the jurisdiction of the licensing authority. Nothing in
this article shall restrict or limit any law, rule, or
regulation pertaining to standards of professional conduct.
(f) Nothing in this article shall limit the
authority of a licensing authority to impose requirements in
addition to those stated in this chapter on any limited
liability partnership or foreign limited liability partnership
rendering professional services within the jurisdiction of the
licensing authority.
(g) A partner's transferable interest in a limited
liability partnership organized to render professional
services may be voluntarily transferred only to a qualified
person.
§10A-8A-10.03. Death or disqualification of partner.
(a) In the case of a limited liability partnership
performing professional services, upon the death of a partner,
upon a partner becoming a disqualified person, or upon a
transferable interest being transferred by operation of law or
court decree to a disqualified person, the transferable
interest of the deceased partner or of the disqualified person
may be transferred to a qualified person and, if not so
transferred, subject to Section 10A-8A-4.09, shall be
purchased by the limited liability partnership as provided in
this section.
(b) If the price of the transferable interest is not
fixed by the partnership agreement, the limited liability
partnership, within six months after the death or 30 days
after the disqualification or transfer, as the case may be,
shall make a written offer to pay to the holder of the
transferable interest a specified price deemed by the limited
liability partnership to be the fair value of the transferable
interest as of the date of the death, disqualification or
transfer. The offer shall be given to the personal
representative of the estate of the deceased partner, the
disqualified person, or the transferee, as the case may be,
and shall be accompanied by a balance sheet of the limited
liability partnership, as of the latest available date and not
more than 12 months prior to the making of the offer, and a
profit and loss statement of the limited liability partnership
for the 12-month period ended on the date of the balance
sheet.
(c) If within 30 days after the date of the written
offer from the limited liability partnership the fair value of
the transferable interest is agreed upon between the personal
representative of the estate of the deceased partner, the
disqualified person, or the transferee, as the case may be,
and the limited liability partnership, payment therefor shall
be made within 90 days, or such other period as the parties
may agree, after the date of the offer. Upon payment of the
agreed value, the personal representative of the estate of the
deceased partner, the disqualified person, or the transferee,
as the case may, be shall cease to have any interest in, or
claim to, the transferable interest.
(d) If within 30 days from the date of the written
offer from the limited liability partnership, the personal
representative of the estate of the deceased partner, the
disqualified person, or the transferee, as the case may be,
and the limited liability partnership do not so agree as to
the fair value of the transferable interest, then either party
may commence a civil action in the circuit court in the county
in which the limited liability partnership's principal place
of business or not for profit activity within this state is
located, and if the limited liability partnership does not
have a principal place of business or not for profit activity
within this state, then the circuit court for the county in
which the limited liability partnership's most recent
registered office is located requesting that the fair value of
the transferable interest be found and determined. The
personal representative of the estate of the deceased partner,
the disqualified person, or the transferee, as the case may
be, wherever residing, shall be made a party to the proceeding
as an action against that person's transferable interest quasi
in rem. Service shall be made in accordance with the rules of
civil procedure. The personal representative of the estate of
the deceased partner, the disqualified person, or the
transferee, as the case may be, shall be entitled to a
judgment against the limited liability partnership for the
amount of the fair value of that person's transferable
interest as of the date of death, disqualification, or
transfer. The court may, in its discretion, order that the
judgment be paid in installments and with interest and on
terms as the court may determine. The court may, if it so
elects, appoint one or more persons as appraisers to receive
evidence and recommend a decision on the question of fair
value. The appraisers shall have the power and authority as
shall be specified in the order of their appointment or an
amendment thereof.
(e) The judgment shall include an allowance for
interest at the rate the court finds to be fair and equitable
in all the circumstances, from the date of death,
disqualification, or transfer.
(f) The costs and expenses of any proceeding shall
be determined by the court and shall be assessed against the
parties in a manner the court deems equitable.
(g) The expenses shall include reasonable
compensation for and reasonable expenses of the appraisers and
a reasonable attorney's fee but shall exclude the fees and
expenses of counsel for and of experts employed by any party;
but:
(1) if the fair value of the transferable interest
as determined materially exceeds the amount which the limited
liability partnership offered to pay therefor, or if no offer
was made by the limited liability partnership, the court in
its discretion may award to the personal representative of the
estate of the deceased partner, the disqualified person, or
the transferee, as the case may be, the sum the court
determines to be reasonable compensation to any expert or
experts employed by the personal representative of the estate
of the deceased partner, the disqualified person, or the
transferee, as the case may be, in the proceeding; and
(2) if the offer of the limited liability
partnership for the transferable interest materially exceeds
the amount of the fair value of the transferable interest as
determined, the court in its discretion may award to the
limited liability partnership the sum the court determines to
be reasonable compensation to any expert or experts employed
by the limited liability partnership, in the proceeding.
(h) If the purchase or transfer of the transferable
interest of a deceased partner, a disqualified person or a
transferee is not completed within 12 months after the death
of the deceased partner or 12 months after the
disqualification or transfer, as the case may be, the limited
liability partnership shall forthwith cancel the transferable
interest on its books and the personal representative of the
estate of the deceased partner, the disqualified person, or
the transferee, as the case may be, shall have no further
interest in the transferable interest other than that person's
right to payment for the transferable interest under this
section.
(i) This section shall not require a limited
liability partnership to purchase a transferable interest of a
disqualified person if the disqualification is for less than
12 months from the date of disqualification. A limited
liability partnership may require the disqualified person to
sell the disqualified person's transferable interest to the
limited liability partnership upon any disqualification.
(j) Any provision of a partnership agreement
regarding the purchase or transfer of a transferable interest
of a limited liability partnership performing professional
services shall be specifically enforceable in the courts of
Alabama.
(k) Nothing in this section shall prevent or relieve
a limited liability partnership from paying pension benefits
or other deferred compensation
Article 11. Transition Rules and Miscellaneous
Provisions.
§10A-8A-11.01. Application to existing
relationships.
(a) Beginning January 1, 2018, this chapter governs
all partnerships and all foreign partnerships.
(b) With respect to a partnership formed before
January 1, 2018, and governed by the laws of this state, the
following rules apply:
(1) a registration of a limited liability
partnership which is current and effective as of December 31,
2017, shall remain effective without further action on the
part of the limited liability partnership, and a partnership
having the status of a limited liability partnership, under
predecessor law, shall have the status of a limited liability
partnership under this chapter and to the extent such
partnership has not filed a statement of limited liability
partnership pursuant to this chapter, the registration or
latest annual notice filed by such partnership under
predecessor law shall constitute a statement of limited
liability partnership filed under this chapter;
(2) a partnership's partnership agreement existing
as of December 31, 2017, shall be deemed to be that
partnership's partnership agreement under this chapter;
(3) a statement of partnership authority is deemed
to be a statement of authority and each statement of
partnership authority existing as of December 31, 2017, shall
remain effective without further action on the part of the
partnership for the remainder of the period of time authorized
under predecessor law, unless earlier amended, in which case,
such statement of partnership authority shall comply with
Section 10A-8A-3.03;
(4) a statement of denial, statement of
dissociation, and statement of dissolution existing as of
December 31, 2017, shall be deemed to be a statement of
denial, statement of dissociation, and statement of
dissolution under this chapter respectively;
(5) a registration of a foreign limited liability
partnership which is current and effective as of December 31,
2017, shall remain effective without further action on the
part of the foreign limited liability partnership, and a
foreign limited liability partnership having the status of a
qualified foreign limited liability partnership, under
predecessor law, shall have the status of a qualified foreign
limited liability partnership under this chapter and to the
extent such partnership has not filed a statement of foreign
limited liability partnership pursuant to this chapter, the
registration or latest annual notice filed by such partnership
under predecessor law shall constitute a statement of foreign
limited liability partnership filed under this chapter; and
(6) if a limited liability partnership or foreign
limited liability partnership is using the phrase "registered
limited liability partnership" or the abbreviation "RLLP" or
"R.L.L.P.," in its name as of December 31, 2017, such phrase
or abbreviation shall continue to comply with Article 5 of
Chapter 1 unless and until it changes or amends, by whatever
means, its name on or after January 1, 2018, at which point it
may only use the term "limited liability partnership" or the
abbreviation "LLP" or "L.L.P.," in its name in compliance with
Article 5 of Chapter 1. No limited liability partnership which
is formed or elects to become a limited liability partnership
on or after January 1, 2018, and no foreign limited liability
partnership which delivers to the Secretary of State of
filing, a statement of foreign limited liability partnership,
may use the phrase "registered limited liability partnership"
or the abbreviation "RLLP" or "R.L.L.P.," in its name.
§10A-8A-11.02. Severability clause. If any provision
of this chapter or its application to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions or applications of this chapter which can be
given effect without the invalid provision or application, and
to this end the provisions of this chapter are severable.
§10A-8A-11.03. Relation to Electronic Signatures in
Global and National Commerce Act. This chapter modifies,
limits, or supersedes the federal Electronic Signatures in
Global and National Commerce Act, 15 U.S.C. Section 7001 et
seq., but this chapter does not modify, limit, or supersede
Section 101(c) of that act or authorize electronic delivery of
any of the notices described in Section 103(b) of that act.
§10A-8A-11.04. Effective date. This chapter takes
effect January 1, 2018.
§10A-8A-11.05. Repeals. Effective January 1, 2018,
the following parts of the Code of Alabama 1975, are repealed:
Sections 10A-1-5.07, 10A-1-7.33, and Sections 10A-8-1.01 to
10A-8-11.04, inclusive, as amended and in effect immediately
before the effective date of this act.
§10A-8A-11.06. Savings clause.
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), the repeal
of a statute by this chapter does not affect:
(1) the operation of the statute or any action taken
under it before its repeal;
(2) any ratification, right, remedy, privilege,
obligation, or liability acquired, accrued, or incurred under
the statute before its repeal;
(3) any violation of the statute, or any penalty,
forfeiture, or punishment incurred because of the violation,
before its repeal; or
(4) any proceeding, reorganization, or dissolution
commenced under the statute before its repeal, and the
proceeding, reorganization, or dissolution may be completed in
accordance with the statute as if it had not been repealed.
(b) If a penalty or punishment imposed for violation
of a statute repealed by this chapter is reduced by this
chapter, the penalty or punishment if not already imposed
shall be imposed in accordance with this chapter.
§10A-8A-11.07. Composite returns. The Alabama
Department of Revenue shall promulgate rules and regulations
similar to those provided under Section 40-18-176, relating to
Alabama S corporations, to permit the filing of annual
composite income tax returns for one or more nonresident
partners, who are individuals, of a partnership, limited
liability partnership or foreign limited liability partnership
with an effective statement of foreign limited liability
partnership on file with the Secretary of State, as well as
one or more nonresident members, who are individuals, of a
limited liability company or foreign limited liability company
and one or more nonresident beneficiaries, who are
individuals, of a business trust, organized under or
recognized by the laws of this state.
§10A-8A-11.08. Taxation of limited liability
partnership. A limited liability partnership and a foreign
limited liability partnership shall be taxed as a partnership
in accordance with Section 40-18-24, as amended from time to
time, will file partnership returns as required by Section
40-18-28, as amended from time to time, and shall for all
other tax purposes be taxed as a partnership, all being
subject to the limited liability partnership and a foreign
limited liability partnership maintaining its status as a
partnership under federal income tax law.
§10A-8A-11.09. Reserved power of the state to alter
or repeal chapter. All provisions of this chapter may be
altered from time to time or repealed and all rights of
partners, partnerships, and agents are subject to this
reservation. Unless expressly stated to the contrary in this
chapter, all amendments of this chapter shall apply to
partners, partnerships, and agents whether or not existing as
such at the time of the enactment of any such amendment.
§10A-8A-11.10. Interstate application. A limited
liability partnership governed by this chapter may conduct its
business or not for profit activity, carry on its operations,
and have and exercise the powers granted by this chapter in
any state, foreign country, or other jurisdiction.
Section 8. This act shall become effective on
January 1, 2018.