SB390
184968-2
By Senator Reed
RFD: Judiciary
First Read: 20-APR-17
184968-2:n:04/12/2017:MA/mfc LRS2017-1511
SYNOPSIS:          Under existing law, any person may file a
petition for the involuntary commitment of a
mentally ill individual to receive inpatient or
outpatient treatment.
This bill would provide a supplemental
procedure for the involuntary assessment and
treatment of an individual who is substance abuse
impaired and who is a threat to himself or herself
or other individuals or is in need of substance
abuse services and, by reason of substance abuse
impairment, his or her judgment has been so
impaired that he or she is incapable of
appreciating his or her need for services.
This bill would authorize any person to file
a petition with the probate court to: (1) require
the involuntary assessment, treatment, and
stabilization of an individual who is substance
abuse impaired for a period of five days that may
be extended under certain conditions; and (2)
require the involuntary treatment of an individual
who is substance abuse impaired for a period of 60
days that may be extended under certain conditions.
This bill would provide for enforcement of
protective custody measures by law enforcement
officers for the involuntary assessment, treatment,
and stabilization of an individual who is substance
abuse impaired.
This bill would provide immunity for law
enforcement officers taking protective custody
measures to enforce the involuntary assessment,
treatment, and stabilization of an individual who
is substance abuse impaired.
This bill would provide criminal penalties
for knowingly providing false information for the
purpose of obtaining an involuntary admission of an
individual for assessment, treatment, and
stabilization of an adult or minor for substance
abuse impairment.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
Relating to substance abuse treatment; to authorize
any person to file a petition in the probate court for the
involuntary assessment, treatment, and stabilization of a
substance abuse impaired individual for a limited period; to
provide for the payment of costs associated with the petition
and treatment; to provide for an ex parte order for an
involuntary assessment under certain conditions; to provide
for the release of the individual under certain conditions; to
authorize any person to file a petition in the probate court
for the involuntary treatment of a substance abuse impaired
individual for a limited period of time; to provide procedures
for a hearing within a specified time frame; to provide for
the appointment of an attorney or a guardian ad litem; to
provide for a burden of proof; to provide for the extension of
involuntary treatment; and to provide for release of the
individual; to provide for enforcement of protective custody
measures by law enforcement officers for the involuntary
assessment, treatment, and stabilization of an individual who
is substance abuse impaired; to provide immunity for law
enforcement officers taking protective custody measures to
enforce the involuntary assessment, treatment, and
stabilization of an individual who is substance abuse
impaired; to provide criminal penalties for knowingly
providing false information for the purpose of obtaining an
involuntary admission of an individual for assessment,
treatment, and stabilization of an adult or minor for
substance abuse impairment.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. For the purposes of this act, the
following terms shall have the following meanings:
(1) IMPAIRED or SUBSTANCE ABUSE IMPAIRED. A
condition involving the use of alcoholic beverages or any drug
in such a manner as to induce mental, emotional, or physical
problems and cause socially dysfunctional behavior and which
causes an individual to inflict, to threaten or attempt to
inflict, or, unless admitted, to be likely to inflict,
physical harm on himself or herself or an individual or to
have his or her judgment so impaired that he or she is
incapable of appreciating his or her need for services and
making a rational decision regarding services.
(2) LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any officer certified
by the Alabama Peace Officers' Standards and Training
Commission.
(3) LICENSED SERVICE PROVIDER. A public agency, a
private for-profit or not-for-profit agency, a physician, or
any other private practitioner licensed under the laws of this
state, a hospital that offers substance abuse services through
one or more licensed service components, or a detoxification
or addictions receiving facility licensed in this state.
(4) QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL. A physician, a physician
assistant, a registered nurse practitioner, a psychologist, or
other mental health provider licensed to practice in this
state, an individual who is certified through a certification
process recognized by the Department of Mental Health for
substance abuse treatment services and who holds, at a
minimum, a bachelor's degree or an individual who is certified
in substance abuse treatment services by a state-recognized
certification process in another state at the time of
employment with a licensed substance abuse provider in this
state.
(5) SUBSTANCE ABUSE. The misuse of, overindulgence
in, or dependence on alcohol or drugs.
Section 2. (a)(1) Any person may file a petition for
involuntary assessment, treatment, and stabilization of an
adult or minor for substance abuse impairment with the probate
court of the county in which the individual is located. The
petition shall be in writing, executed under oath, and shall
include all of the following information:
a. The name of the individual to be admitted
involuntarily.
b. The name of the petitioner or petitioners.
c. The relationship between the individual and the
petitioner.
d. The name of the individual's attorney, if known.
e. A statement of the petitioner's knowledge of the
individual's ability to afford an attorney.
f. The findings and recommendations of the
assessment performed by the qualified professional.
g. Facts supporting the need for involuntary
treatment, including the reason for the petitioner's belief
that the individual is substance abuse impaired and because of
the impairment the individual:
1. Has lost the power of self-control with respect
to substance use and has either:
(i) Inflicted or threatened to inflict, or unless
assessed and stabilized, is likely to inflict, physical harm
on himself or herself or another; or
(ii) Is in need of substance abuse services and, by
reason of substance abuse impairment, his or her judgment has
been so impaired that the person is incapable of appreciating
his or her need for such services and of making a rational
decision in regard thereto.
(2) Mere refusal to request or receive substance
abuse mitigating services on the part of the individual
requested to be admitted for involuntary assessment and
stabilization under this section shall not constitute evidence
of lack of judgment with respect to his or her need for
services.
(3) The petitioner shall be responsible for any
filing fee and associated court costs.
(b) Upon receipt and filing of the petition for the
involuntary assessment and stabilization of a substance abuse
impaired individual by the clerk of the probate court, the
court shall ascertain whether the individual is represented by
an attorney, and if not, whether, on the basis of the
petition, an attorney should be appointed; and shall do either
of the following:
(1) Provide a copy of the petition and notice of
hearing to the individual; the individual's parent, guardian,
or legal custodian, in the case of a minor; the individual's
attorney, if known; the petitioner; the individual's spouse or
guardian, if applicable; and any other persons as the court
may direct, and have the petition and notice personally
delivered to the individual if he or she is a minor. The court
shall also issue a summons to the individual whose admission
is sought and conduct a hearing within 10 days.
(2) Without the appointment of an attorney and,
relying solely on the contents of the petition, enter an ex
parte order authorizing the involuntary assessment and
stabilization of the individual. The court may order a law
enforcement officer or other designated agent of the court to
take the individual into custody and deliver him or her to the
nearest appropriate licensed service provider.
(c)(1) At a hearing initiated in accordance with
subdivision (1) of subsection (b), the probate court shall
hear all relevant testimony. The individual must be present
unless the court has reason to believe that his or her
presence is likely to be injurious to him or her, in which
event the court shall appoint a guardian ad litem to represent
the individual. The individual has the right to examination by
a court-appointed qualified professional. After hearing all
the evidence, the court shall determine whether there is a
reasonable basis to believe the individual is substance abuse
impaired.
(2) Based on its determination, the court shall
either dismiss the petition or immediately enter an order
authorizing the involuntary assessment and stabilization of
the individual; or, if in the course of the hearing the court
has reason to believe that the individual, due to mental
illness other than or in addition to substance abuse
impairment, is likely to injure himself or herself or another
if allowed to remain at liberty, the court may initiate
involuntary proceedings under Chapter 52, Title 22, Code of
Alabama 1975.
(3) If the court enters an order authorizing
involuntary assessment and stabilization, the order shall
include the court's findings with respect to the availability
and appropriateness of the least restrictive alternatives and
the need for the appointment of an attorney to represent the
individual, and may designate the specific licensed service
provider to perform the involuntary assessment and
stabilization of the individual. The individual may choose the
licensed service provider to deliver the involuntary
assessment where possible and appropriate. The involuntarily
admitted person may also provide his or her consent to be
referred to a service provider for voluntary admission when
the service provider determines that the individual no longer
meets the criteria for involuntary admission.
(4) If necessary, the probate court may order a law
enforcement officer or other agent of the court to take the
individual into custody and deliver him or her to the licensed
service provider specified in the court order or, if none is
specified, to the nearest appropriate licensed service
provider for involuntary assessment.
(d) A licensed service provider may admit an
individual for involuntary assessment and stabilization for a
period not to exceed five days. The individual must be
assessed without unnecessary delay by a qualified
professional. If an assessment is performed by a qualified
professional who is not a physician, the assessment must be
reviewed by a physician before the end of the assessment
period.
(e)(1) If a licensed service provider is unable to
complete the involuntary assessment and, if necessary,
stabilization of an individual within five days after the
court's order, it may file a written request for an extension
of time to complete its assessment within the original time
period, and, in accordance with confidentiality requirements,
shall furnish a copy to all parties.
(2) With or without a hearing, the court may grant
additional time, not to exceed seven days after the date of
the renewal order, for the completion of the involuntary
assessment and stabilization of the individual. The original
court order authorizing the involuntary assessment and
stabilization, or a request for an extension of time to
complete the assessment and stabilization that is timely filed
pursuant to this section, constitutes legal authority to
involuntarily hold the individual for a period not to exceed
10 days in the absence of a court order to the contrary.
(f) Based upon the involuntary assessment, a
qualified professional of a licensed service provider, or a
qualified professional when a less restrictive component has
been used, must do the following:
(1) Release the individual and, where appropriate,
refer the individual to another treatment facility or service
provider, or to community services.
(2) Allow the individual, upon his or her consent,
to remain voluntarily at the licensed provider.
(3) Retain the individual when a petition for
involuntary treatment has been initiated, the timely filing of
which authorizes the service provider to retain physical
custody of the individual pending further order of the court.
(g) The petitioner shall be responsible for all
costs associated with the involuntary assessment and
stabilization of the individual.
Section 3. (a) A substance abuse impaired individual
may be the subject of a petition for court-ordered involuntary
treatment pursuant to this section, if either of the following
circumstances are satisfied:
(1) The individual has been assessed by a qualified
professional within five days.
(2) The individual has been subject to involuntary
assessment and stabilization pursuant to Section 2 within the
previous 12 days.
(b)(1) Any person may file a petition for
involuntary treatment of an adult or minor for substance abuse
impairment with the probate court of the county in which the
individual is located. The petition shall be in writing,
executed under oath, and shall include all of the following
information:
a. The name of the individual to be admitted.
b. The name of the petitioner or petitioners.
c. The relationship between the individual and the
petitioner.
d. The name of the individual's attorney, if known.
e. A statement of the petitioner's knowledge of the
individual's ability to afford an attorney.
f. The findings and recommendations of the
assessment performed by the qualified professional.
g. Facts supporting the need for involuntary
treatment, including the reason for the petitioner's belief
that the individual is substance abuse impaired and because of
the impairment the individual:
1. Has lost the power of self-control with respect
to substance use and has either:
(i) Inflicted or threatened to inflict, or unless
assessed and stabilized, is likely to inflict, physical harm
on himself or herself or another; or
(ii) Is in need of substance abuse services and, by
reason of substance abuse impairment, his or her judgment has
been so impaired that the person is incapable of appreciating
his or her need for such services and of making a rational
decision in regard thereto.
(2) Mere refusal to request or receive substance
abuse mitigating services on the part of the individual
requested to be admitted for involuntary treatment under this
section shall not constitute evidence of lack of judgment with
respect to his or her need for services.
(3) The petitioner shall be responsible for any
filing fee and associated court costs.
(c)(1) Upon the filing of a petition for the
involuntary treatment of a substance abuse impaired individual
with the clerk of the probate court, the court shall
immediately determine whether the individual is represented by
an attorney or whether the appointment of counsel for the
individual is appropriate.
(2) The court shall schedule a hearing to be held on
the petition within 10 days.
(3) A copy of the petition and notice of the hearing
must be provided to the individual; the individual's parent,
guardian, or legal custodian, in the case of a minor; the
individual's attorney, if known; the petitioner; the
individual's spouse or guardian, if applicable; and such other
persons as the court may direct, and have such petition and
order personally delivered to the individual if he or she is a
minor. The court shall also issue a summons to the individual
whose admission is sought.
(4) If the individual is determined to be indigent
or does not have the mental ability to secure the services of
an attorney, the probate judge shall appoint an attorney, who
may be the same person as an appointed guardian ad litem, to
represent the individual. The probate judge shall immediately
inform the appointed attorney of his or her appointment.
(d)(1) At a hearing on a petition for involuntary
treatment, the court shall hear and review all relevant
evidence, including the review of results of the assessment
completed by the qualified professional in connection with the
individual's protective custody, emergency admission,
involuntary assessment, or alternative involuntary admission.
The individual must be present unless the court finds that his
or her presence is likely to be injurious to himself or
herself or others, in which event the court must appoint a
guardian ad litem to act on behalf of the individual
throughout the proceedings.
(2) The petitioner has the burden of proving by
clear and convincing evidence that the individual is substance
abuse impaired.
(3) At the conclusion of the hearing, the probate
court shall either dismiss the petition or order the
individual to undergo involuntary substance abuse treatment,
with the individual's chosen licensed service provider to
deliver the involuntary substance abuse treatment where
possible and appropriate.
(e)(1) When the court finds that the conditions for
involuntary substance abuse treatment have been proved by
clear and convincing evidence, it may order the individual to
undergo involuntary treatment by a licensed service provider
for a period not to exceed 60 days. If the court finds it
necessary, it may direct a law enforcement officer or other
agent of the court to take the individual into custody and
deliver him or her to the licensed service provider specified
in the court order, or to the nearest appropriate licensed
service provider, for involuntary treatment. When the
conditions justifying involuntary treatment no longer exist,
the individual must be released. When the conditions
justifying involuntary treatment are expected to exist after
60 days of treatment, a renewal of the involuntary treatment
order may be requested pursuant to subsection (g), prior to
the end of the 60-day period.
(2) In all cases resulting in an order for
involuntary substance abuse treatment, the court shall retain
jurisdiction over the case and the parties for the entry of
further orders as the circumstances may require. The court's
requirements for notification of proposed release must be
included in the original treatment order.
(3) An involuntary treatment order authorizes the
licensed service provider to require the individual to undergo
such treatment as will benefit him or her, including treatment
at any licensable service component of a licensed service
provider.
(f)(1) At any time prior to the end of the 60-day
involuntary treatment period, or prior to the end of any
extension granted pursuant to subsection (g), an individual
admitted for involuntary treatment shall be discharged when
the individual is no longer substance abuse impaired.
(2) If, at any time, the safety of an individual
cannot be maintained by the provider, the provider may request
an order from the court providing for the early release or
transfer of the individual to another licensed service
provider. A court shall grant or deny a request under this
subdivision within three calendar days of receipt of the
request.
(3) If a qualified professional determines that an
individual admitted for involuntary treatment is eligible for
release under subdivision (1) or if early release is requested
under subdivision (2), the service provider shall immediately
discharge the individual and notify all persons specified by
the court in the original treatment order.
(g)(1) Whenever a service provider believes that an
individual who is nearing the scheduled date of release from
involuntary treatment remains substance abuse impaired, a
petition for renewal of the involuntary treatment order may be
filed with the court at least 10 days before the expiration of
the court-ordered treatment period. The court shall
immediately schedule a hearing to be held not more than 15
days after filing of the petition. The court shall provide the
copy of the petition for renewal and the notice of the hearing
to all parties to the proceeding. The hearing is conducted
pursuant to subsection (d).
(2) If the court finds that the petition for renewal
of the involuntary treatment order should be granted, it may
order the individual to undergo involuntary treatment for a
period not to exceed an additional 90 days. When the
conditions justifying involuntary treatment no longer exist,
the individual must be released. When the conditions
justifying involuntary treatment continue to exist after 90
days of additional treatment, a new petition requesting
renewal of the involuntary treatment order may be filed
pursuant to this section.
(h) At the conclusion of the 60-day period of
court-ordered involuntary treatment, the individual is
automatically discharged unless a motion for renewal of the
involuntary treatment order has been filed with the court
pursuant to subsection (d).
(i) The petitioner shall be responsible for all
costs associated with the involuntary treatment of the
individual.
Section 4. (a) A law enforcement officer may conduct
protective custody measures under this section when an adult
or minor appears to meet involuntary admissions criteria for
substance abuse impairment and is either of the following:
(1) Brought to the attention of law enforcement.
(2) Present in a public place.
(b) An individual in a situation that justifies
protective custody under this section may be assisted by a law
enforcement officer to his or her home, a hospital, or to a
licensed detoxification or addictions receiving facility, or
whichever is most appropriate.
(c) If an individual in a situation that justifies
protective custody under this section fails or refuses to
consent to assistance and a law enforcement officer determines
that a hospital or a licensed detoxification or addictions
receiving facility is the most appropriate place for the
person to be taken, the officer, after giving consideration to
the expressed wishes of the individual may do either of the
following:
(1) Take the person to a hospital or to a licensed
detoxification or addictions receiving facility against the
person's will but without the use of unreasonable force.
(2) In the case of an adult, detain the person for
his or her own protection in any municipal or county jail or
other appropriate detention facility until a determination of
further disposition can be made by the court having
jurisdiction.
(d) Protective custody subject to detention by a law
enforcement officer under this section shall not be considered
an arrest for any purpose, and no entry or other record may be
made to indicate that a person subject to temporary detention
by a law enforcement officer under this section has been
detained or charged with any crime.
(e) A law enforcement officer acting in good faith
pursuant to this section may not be held civilly or criminally
liable for false imprisonment.
(f) The Department of Mental Health shall maintain a
current list of licensed hospitals, detoxification facilities,
and addictions receiving facilities to include the name,
address, contact information, and services provided and make
the information available to the public on its official web
page.
Section 5. (a) Knowingly providing false information
for the purpose of obtaining an involuntary admission of an
individual for assessment, treatment, and stabilization of an
adult or minor for substance abuse impairment under this act
shall be a Class A misdemeanor.
(b) Causing, otherwise securing, or conspiring with
or assisting another person in the obtaining, causing, or
securing, without reason for believing a person to be
impaired, any involuntary admission of an individual for
assessment, treatment, and stabilization of an adult or minor
for substance abuse impairment under this act shall be a Class
A misdemeanor.
Section 6. This act is supplemental to the
procedures provided for involuntary treatment of mentally ill
persons provided for in Chapter 52, Title 22, Code of Alabama
1975.
Section 7. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.