SB349
184249-1
By Senator Beasley
RFD: Governmental Affairs
First Read: 04-APR-17
184249-1:n:03/16/2017:FC/tgw LRS2017-1326
SYNOPSIS:           Under existing law, a person licensed to
perform prosthetic, orthotic, or pedorthic services
in another state may perform services in this state
for 60 days in a 12 month period after notification
to the board.
This bill would delete this exemption. The
bill would also add an exemption for persons
licensed in another state providing services at an
association meeting or training event.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
To amend Section 34-25A-5 of the Code of Alabama
1975, relating to the Board of Prosthetists and Orthotists, to
further provide for certain temporary exemptions for persons
licensed in another state.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Section 34-25A-5 of the Code of Alabama
1975, is amended to read as follows:
"ยง34-25A-5.
"(a) Except as provided in subsection (h) or (i), no
person shall administer prosthetic, orthotic, or pedorthic
care in this state unless licensed or registered to do so in
accordance with this chapter. The board shall issue approved
forms for application prior to January 1, 2003.
"(b) In order to obtain a license as a prosthetist,
orthotist, or prosthetist/orthotist in this state, an
applicant shall be a citizen of the United States or, if not a
citizen of the United States, a person who is legally present
in the United States with appropriate documentation from the
federal government, and shall do the following:
"(1) File a written application on forms to be
developed and approved by the board. The applicant shall meet
at least one of the following requirements after a one-year
grandfather period:
"a. The applicant shall possess a baccalaureate
degree in orthotics and prosthetics from a college or
university accredited by a regional accrediting agency and
complete 1,900 hours per discipline sought of directed
employment under the supervision of a certified/licensed
prosthetist, a certified/licensed orthotist or a
certified/licensed prosthetist/orthotist in an accredited
facility, and be certified as a prosthetist, orthotist, or
prosthetist/orthotist by a nationally recognized certifying
board in orthotics and prosthetics accredited by the National
Commission for Certifying Agencies (NCCA), or such other
national agency as approved by the board, in the discipline or
disciplines for which the application is made.
"b. The applicant shall possess a baccalaureate
degree from a regionally accredited college or university and
have successfully completed a post-baccalaureate certificate
course approved by the board and completed 1,900 hours of
directed employment per discipline in which license is sought
under the supervision of a certified/licensed prosthetist, a
certified/licensed orthotist, or a certified/licensed
prosthetist/orthotist in an accredited facility, and be
certified by a nationally recognized certifying board in
prosthetics or orthotics accredited by the National Commission
for Certifying Agencies (NCCA), or such other national agency
as approved by the board, in the discipline or disciplines for
which application is made.
"c. The applicant shall possess an associate's
degree from a regionally accredited college or university,
junior college, or community college and have successfully
completed postsecondary coursework in anatomy, physiology,
physics, biology, chemistry, algebra, and calculus and have
worked under the supervision of a certified/licensed
prosthetist, a certified/licensed orthotist, or a
certified/licensed prosthetist/orthotist for not less than
four consecutive years of the past six years in an accredited
facility, and be certified by a nationally recognized
certifying board in prosthetics or orthotics accredited by the
National Commission for Certifying Agencies (NCCA), or such
other national agency as may be approved by the board.
"d. The applicant shall have successfully completed
postsecondary coursework in anatomy, physiology, physics,
biology, chemistry, algebra, and calculus and have worked
under the supervision of a certified/licensed prosthetist, a
certified/licensed orthotist, or a certified/licensed
prosthetist/orthotist for not less than eight years of the
last 12 years and be certified as a prosthetist, orthotist, or
prosthetist/orthotist by a nationally recognized board
accredited by the National Commission for Certifying Agencies
(NCCA), or such national agency as may be approved by the
board, in the discipline or disciplines for which application
is made.
"(2) Any applicant after the first year following
the board's issuance of applications shall meet the
requirements of subdivision (1) of subsection (b) prior to
receiving a license as a prosthetist, an orthotist, or a
prosthetist/orthotist.
"(c) In order to obtain a license as a pedorthist in
this state, an applicant shall be a citizen of the United
States or, if not a citizen of the United States, a person who
is legally present in the United States with appropriate
documentation from the federal government, and shall file a
written application on forms to be developed and approved by
the board. Applicants shall be in good standing as a certified
pedorthist with an entity accredited by the National
Commission for Certifying Agencies.
"(d) In order to obtain registration as an orthotic
supplier, an applicant shall be a citizen of the United States
or, if not a citizen of the United States, a person who is
legally present in the United States with appropriate
documentation from the federal government, and shall do the
following:
"(1) File a written application on forms to be
developed and approved by the board. Such forms shall require
personal information such as full name, current address,
educational status and history, and work history for the last
five years of employment.
"(2) The application forms shall be accompanied,
when submitted, by attestation of employment by or contractual
relationship with a manufacturer of orthoses or orthosis
components whether registered with the United States Food and
Drug Administration or not. Attestation shall be by notarized
statement signed by the president, chief operating officer, or
other designated corporate official of the employing company.
"(e) The board shall grant a license without an
examination for those qualified applicants who apply within
one year of the issuance of application forms by the board.
For purposes of this subsection, qualified applicants are
those who possess current credentials as a Certified
Prosthetist, Certified Orthotist, or Certified
Prosthetist/Orthotist issued by the American Board for
Certification in Orthotics and Prosthetics, Incorporated, or
the Board for Orthotist/Prosthetist Certification as a
prosthetist, orthotist, or prosthetist/orthotist.
"(f) The board may issue a 12-month temporary
license as a prosthetist, an orthotist, a pedorthist, or a
prosthetist/orthotist to persons who have applied for
licensure and are awaiting examination. The temporary license
is renewable once for a six-month period if the applicant
fails to pass the examination at the first sitting.
"(g) The board shall grant a license as a
prosthetist, an orthotist, a prosthetist/orthotist, or
pedorthist to an applicant in possession of a current license
as a prosthetist, orthotist, prosthetist/orthotist, or
pedorthist in another state or territory of the United States
without examination if the board determines that the
credentialing standards set by the other state or territory
are substantially equivalent to the standards set by the board
for this state.
"(h) No person may represent himself or herself as a
licensed prosthetist, licensed orthotist, licensed
prosthetist/orthotist, or licensed pedorthist, use a title or
description of services, or engage in the practice of
prosthetics, orthotics, or pedorthics without applying for
licensure, meeting the required qualifications, and being
licensed by the board unless otherwise exempted by this
chapter. A person not licensed with the board may not
represent himself or herself as being so licensed and may not
use, in connection with his or her name, the words licensed
orthotist, orthotist, licensed prosthetist, prosthetist,
licensed prosthetist/orthotist, prosthetist/orthotist,
licensed pedorthist, pedorthist, licensed orthotic fitter,
orthotic fitter, licensed mastectomy fitter, mastectomy
fitter, licensed therapeutic shoe fitter, therapeutic shoe
fitter, or letters "L.O.," "L.P.," "L.P.O.," "L.O.A.," "LPed,"
"L.P.A.," "L.P.O.A.," "L.M.F.," "L.O.F.," "L.T.S.F." or other
letters, words, signs, numbers, or insignia indicating or
implying that he or she is either a licensed prosthetist, a
licensed orthotist, a licensed prosthetist/orthotist, a
licensed pedorthist, a licensed mastectomy fitter, a licensed
therapeutic shoe fitter, or a licensed orthotic fitter in the
State of Alabama without first having a valid license. The
license shall be posted in a conspicuous location at the
person's work site.
"(i) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
prohibit or restrict the following:
"(1) The practice of prosthetics, orthotics, or
pedorthics by individuals authorized and performing services
within their authorized scopes of practice as adopted by the
State of Alabama Legislature including, but not limited to,
authorized health care practitioners, doctors of podiatry,
chiropractors, physical therapists, and occupational
therapists licensed in this state.
"(2) The practice of prosthetics, orthotics, or
pedorthics by an individual employed by, or in the service of
the government of the United States of America while engaged
in the performance of duties prescribed by the laws of the
United States of America.
"(3) The practice of prosthetics, orthotics, or
pedorthics by any person not licensed as a prosthetist,
orthotist, prosthetist/orthotist, orthotic fitter, therapeutic
shoe fitter, or pedorthist in accordance with this chapter who
is employed in a hospital, rehabilitation facility, or
authorized health care practitioner's office under the
direction of an authorized health care practitioner.
"(4) A person fulfilling the supervised residency or
internship experience requirements described in this chapter.
"(5) A person who meets the qualifications listed in
subdivision (1) of subsection (b) from performing prosthetic,
orthotic, or pedorthic services in this state, provided the
services are not performed for more than 60 days per 12-month
period, after notification to the board. The practice of
prosthetics, orthotics, or pedorthics by a clinician who is
certified or licensed in another state at meetings of the
Alabama Prosthetic & Orthotic Association (APOA) or similar
organizations or at training events approved by the board to
provide clinical services performed by a certified or licensed
clinician.
"(6) The practice of pharmacy by an individual
subject to Chapter 23 of this title."
Section 2. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.