HB527
184368-2
By Representative Morrow (N & P)
RFD: Local Legislation
First Read: 18-APR-17
184368-2:n:03/27/2017:PMG/th LRS2017-1346R1
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
Relating to Lauderdale County; to amend Section
45-39-90, Code of Alabama 1975, relating to the Lauderdale
County Community Development Fund; to provide that the
proceeds in the Community Development Fund, after the
establishment of an agriculture authority in the county, shall
be distributed so that two-thirds of the proceeds go to the
commission and one-third of the proceeds go to the authority.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Section 45-39-90, Code of Alabama 1975,
is amended to read as follows:
"ยง45-39-90.
"(a) The Lauderdale County Community Development
Commission is hereby created. The commission may receive and
by majority vote distribute any funds in the Community
Development Fund created pursuant to subsection (d) for the
purposes of promoting economic development, education,
recreation, conservation, and fire protection. The commission
may also expend funds for the purposes authorized in Section
29-2-120.
"(b) The commission shall be comprised of the
following members who shall administer this section and who
shall be eligible for successive terms:
"(1) An elected Lauderdale County official appointed
by joint agreement by the legislative delegation representing
Lauderdale County for a term of one year or until a
replacement is appointed.
"(2) A person appointed by each senator representing
Lauderdale County whose term shall coincide with the term of
the senator or until a replacement is appointed.
"(3) A person appointed by each member of the House
of Representatives representing a portion of Lauderdale County
whose term shall coincide with the term of the representative
or until a replacement is appointed.
"(c) The commission may promulgate rules related to
its operations and procedures for the awarding of grants
within the community for the above mentioned purposes.
"(d) The Community Development Fund is created
within the Lauderdale County treasury. The fund shall be
comprised of the additional three percent of TVA
in-lieu-of-tax payments received pursuant to Section 40-28-2,
beginning with the fiscal year which began October 1, 2006.
These funds shall be expended on order of the Lauderdale
County Community Development Commission; however, after the
establishment of an agriculture authority in the county,
two-thirds of the proceeds shall be distributed to the
commission and one-third of the proceeds shall be distributed
to the authority."
Section 2. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.