HB250
182133-2
By Representative Sells
RFD: State Government
First Read: 16-FEB-17
ENGROSSED
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
Relating to emergency medical services personnel; to
amend Section 22-18-6, Code of Alabama 1975; to add a new
Article 4, commencing with Section 22-18-50, to Chapter 18 of
Title 22 of the Code of Alabama 1975; to establish the
Emergency Medical Services Personnel Licensure Interstate
Compact; to provide reciprocity among member states on matters
relating to discipline and conditions of practice of EMS
personnel; to make this state a member of the Interstate
Commission for EMS Personnel Practice; and to allow EMS
personnel from compact states to practice in Alabama in
limited circumstances without a state license.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Section 22-18-6, Code of Alabama 1975, is
amended to read as follows:
"ยง22-18-6.
"(a) It shall be a Class A misdemeanor for any
person, firm, company, corporation, organization, facility, or
agency to do any of the following:
"(1) Deliberately hinder, obstruct, or interfere
with an officer, inspector, or duly authorized agent of the
board while in the performance of official duties.
"(2) Deliberately hinder, obstruct, or interfere
with any physician, licensed nurse, licensed EMSP, or
emergency personnel exempt from licensure under the provisions
of this article while that person is providing emergency care
to a third person or while that person is assisting at the
scene of an emergency, directing traffic at the scene of an
emergency, or managing or helping to manage the scene of an
emergency.
"(3) Violate subsection (c) or (d) of this section.
"(4) Offer, provide, or perform, without a license
or certificate to do so, an emergency medical service or other
function which, under the provisions of this article or the
rules adopted pursuant thereto, may not be performed without a
license or certificate issued by the Board of Health;
provided, however, this subdivision does not apply to
emergency medical service personnel who have the privilege to
practice in the state pursuant to the Emergency Medical
Services Personnel Licensure Interstate Compact. No person
shall be subject to criminal liability pursuant to this
section in the event he or she renders first aid or emergency
care at the scene of an injury caused by a motor vehicle crash
or by some other incident, or at the scene of a mass casualty
or disaster if:
"a. The first aid or emergency care is rendered
gratuitously and in good faith; and
"b. The first aid or emergency care is not rendered
in the course of a business, program, or system which
regularly engages in the provision of emergency medical care.
"(b) Nothing in this section shall be construed to
repeal, abridge, or modify Section 6-5-332 or any other good
Samaritan statute.
"(c) No person shall regularly engage in providing
emergency medical care at the scene of emergencies unless he
or she is licensed as EMSP as defined in this article, or
unless he or she is exempted from licensure pursuant to the
provisions of this article. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit any
physician or nurse licensed in Alabama from performing any act
within his or her scope of practice. No person shall hold
himself or herself out to be EMSP, unless he or she is
licensed as such as defined in this chapter. EMSP licensed in
other jurisdictions may identify themselves as holding such
licensure.
"(d) The board shall by rule establish the scope of
privilege for each level of EMSP licensure. No person shall
exceed the scope of privilege granted to his or her level of
licensure.
"(e) Control of an emergency scene may be taken by
EMSP if the personnel arrive at the scene of an emergency
prior to the arrival of law enforcement personnel, and if
managing the emergency scene will not interfere with other
emergency medical care duties. Emergency scene control shall
include the authority to direct traffic. A driver of a motor
vehicle entering an emergency scene or entering a roadway
adjacent to an emergency scene shall use caution, shall
maintain proper control of the motor vehicle, and shall obey
the directions of law enforcement personnel and emergency
personnel at the scene. Any person violating this subsection
shall be guilty of a violation.
"(f) The board may, following the contested case
provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act, suspend or
revoke the license or certificate of EMSP at any level, or a
provider service, or it may refuse to grant a license or
certificate to any person or entity at any time that any of
the following is determined with respect to the holder or
applicant:
"(1) Does not meet or no longer meets the prescribed
qualifications.
"(2) Is guilty of misconduct as defined by the
board's rules or otherwise commits a violation of this act or
any rules promulgated thereunder.
"(3) Has failed to maintain the required level of
continuing education units or any equivalent therefor defined
in the board's rules.
"(4) Has provided care to a patient or patients
under his or her care which falls short of the standard of
care which ordinarily would be expected to be provided by
similarly situated EMSP in Alabama, and has thereby
jeopardized the life, health, or safety of a patient or
patients.
"(5) Has sexually or physically abused a patient
under his or her care.
"(6) Has submitted a license or test application, a
report of continuing education requirements, a run report, a
patient care record, EMSP student record, clinical rotation
record, intent to train form, self-study document, fluid and
drug application, physician medication order form, or any
other document which is material to the duties and
qualifications of EMSP or those of a student in an EMSP
training program and which is fraudulent or knowingly false in
any respect.
"(7) Has committed fraud in the performance of his
or her duties or in connection with any matter related to
emergency medical services.
"(8) Has been convicted of a crime involving moral
turpitude, or a crime in which the victim is an EMSP provider
service or an EMS patient, unless the board determines that
the fact of the conviction would not likely interfere with the
performance of EMS duties.
"(9) Has performed any act requiring licensure or
certification under state EMS statutes, without possession of
the requisite licensure or certification.
"(10) Has performed any act which exceeds the scope
of license or privilege granted to the holder."
Section 2. A new Article 4, commencing with Section
22-18-50, is added to Chapter 18 of Title 22 of the Code of
Alabama 1975, to read as follows:
ARTICLE 4. Emergency Medical Services Personnel
Licensure Interstate Compact.
ยง22-18-50.
The Emergency Medical Services Personnel Licensure
Interstate Compact is hereby enacted into law and entered into
with all other jurisdictions legally joining therein in form
substantially as follows:
SECTION 1. PURPOSE.
In order to protect the public through verification
of competency and ensure accountability for patient care
related activities all states license emergency medical
services (EMS) personnel, such as emergency medical
technicians (EMTs), advanced EMTs and paramedics. This Compact
is intended to facilitate the day to day movement of EMS
personnel across state boundaries in the performance of their
EMS duties as assigned by an appropriate authority and
authorize state EMS offices to afford immediate legal
recognition to EMS personnel licensed in a member state. This
Compact recognizes that states have a vested interest in
protecting the public's health and safety through their
licensing and regulation of EMS personnel and that such state
regulation shared among the member states will best protect
public health and safety. This Compact is designed to achieve
the following purposes and objectives:
1. Increase public access to EMS personnel;
2. Enhance the states' ability to protect the
public's health and safety, especially patient safety;
3. Encourage the cooperation of member states in the
areas of EMS personnel licensure and regulation;
4. Support licensing of military members who are
separating from an active duty tour and their spouses;
5. Facilitate the exchange of information between
member states regarding EMS personnel licensure, adverse
action and significant investigatory information;
6. Promote compliance with the laws governing EMS
personnel practice in each member state; and
7. Invest all member states with the authority to
hold EMS personnel accountable through the mutual recognition
of member state licenses.
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS
In this Compact:
A. "Advanced Emergency Medical Technician (AEMT)"
means: an individual licensed with cognitive knowledge and a
scope of practice that corresponds to that level in the
National EMS Education Standards and National EMS Scope of
Practice Model.
B. "Adverse Action" means: any administrative,
civil, equitable or criminal action permitted by a state's law
which may be imposed against licensed EMS personnel by a state
EMS authority or state court, including, but not limited to,
actions against an individual's license such as revocation,
suspension, probation, consent agreement, monitoring or other
limitation or encumbrance on the individual's practice,
letters of reprimand or admonition, fines, criminal
convictions and state court judgments enforcing adverse
actions by the state EMS authority.
C. "Alternative program" means: a voluntary,
non-disciplinary substance abuse recovery program approved by
a state EMS authority.
D. "Certification" means: the successful
verification of entry-level cognitive and psychomotor
competency using a reliable, validated, and legally defensible
examination.
E. "Commission" means: the national administrative
body of which all states that have enacted the Compact are
members.
F. "Emergency Medical Technician (EMT)" means: an
individual licensed with cognitive knowledge and a scope of
practice that corresponds to that level in the National EMS
Education Standards and National EMS Scope of Practice Model.
G. "Home State" means: a member state where an
individual is licensed to practice emergency medical services.
H. "License" means: the authorization by a state for
an individual to practice as an EMT, AEMT, paramedic, or a
level in between EMT and paramedic.
I. "Medical Director" means: a physician licensed in
a member state who is accountable for the care delivered by
EMS personnel.
J. "Member State" means: a state that has enacted
this Compact.
K. "Privilege to Practice" means: an individual's
authority to deliver emergency medical services in remote
states as authorized under this Compact.
L. "Paramedic" means: an individual licensed with
cognitive knowledge and a scope of practice that corresponds
to that level in the National EMS Education Standards and
National EMS Scope of Practice Model.
M. "Remote State" means: a member state in which an
individual is not licensed.
N. "Restricted" means: the outcome of an adverse
action that limits a license or the privilege to practice.
O. "Rule" means: a written statement by the
interstate Commission promulgated pursuant to Section 12 of
this Compact that is of general applicability; implements,
interprets, or prescribes a policy or provision of the
Compact; or is an organizational, procedural, or practice
requirement of the Commission and has the force and effect of
statutory law in a member state and includes the amendment,
repeal, or suspension of an existing rule.
P. "Scope of Practice" means: defined parameters of
various duties or services that may be provided by an
individual with specific credentials. Whether regulated by
rule, statute, or court decision, it tends to represent the
limits of services an individual may perform.
Q. "Significant Investigatory Information" means:
1. investigative information that a state EMS
authority, after a preliminary inquiry that includes
notification and an opportunity to respond if required by
state law, has reason to believe, if proved true, would result
in the imposition of an adverse action on a license or
privilege to practice; or
2. investigative information that indicates that the
individual represents an immediate threat to public health and
safety regardless of whether the individual has been notified
and had an opportunity to respond.
R. "State" means: any state, commonwealth, district,
or territory of the United States.
S. "State EMS Authority" means: the board, office,
or other agency with the legislative mandate to license EMS
personnel.
SECTION 3. HOME STATE LICENSURE
A. Any member state in which an individual holds a
current license shall be deemed a home state for purposes of
this Compact.
B. Any member state may require an individual to
obtain and retain a license to be authorized to practice in
the member state under circumstances not authorized by the
privilege to practice under the terms of this Compact.
C. A home state's license authorizes an individual
to practice in a remote state under the privilege to practice
only if the home state:
1. Currently requires the use of the National
Registry of Emergency Medical Technicians (NREMT) examination
as a condition of issuing initial licenses at the EMT and
paramedic levels;
2. Has a mechanism in place for receiving and
investigating complaints about individuals;
3. Notifies the Commission, in compliance with the
terms herein, of any adverse action or significant
investigatory information regarding an individual;
4. No later than five years after activation of the
Compact, requires a criminal background check of all
applicants for initial licensure, including the use of the
results of fingerprint or other biometric data checks
compliant with the requirements of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation with the exception of federal employees who have
suitability determination in accordance with US CFR ยง731.202
and submit documentation of such as promulgated in the rules
of the Commission; and
5. Complies with the rules of the Commission.
SECTION 4. Compact PRIVILEGE TO PRACTICE
A. Member states shall recognize the privilege to
practice of an individual licensed in another member state
that is in conformance with Section 3.
B. To exercise the privilege to practice under the
terms and provisions of this Compact, an individual must:
1. Be at least 18 years of age;
2. Possess a current unrestricted license in a
member state as an EMT, AEMT, paramedic, or state recognized
and licensed level with a scope of practice and authority
between EMT and paramedic; and
3. Practice under the supervision of a medical
director.
C. An individual providing patient care in a remote
state under the privilege to practice shall function within
the scope of practice authorized by the home state unless and
until modified by an appropriate authority in the remote state
as may be defined in the rules of the commission.
D. Except as provided in Section 4 subsection C, an
individual practicing in a remote state will be subject to the
remote state's authority and laws. A remote state may, in
accordance with due process and that state's laws, restrict,
suspend, or revoke an individual's privilege to practice in
the remote state and may take any other necessary actions to
protect the health and safety of its citizens. If a remote
state takes action it shall promptly notify the home state and
the Commission.
E. If an individual's license in any home state is
restricted or suspended, the individual shall not be eligible
to practice in a remote state under the privilege to practice
until the individual's home state license is restored.
F. If an individual's privilege to practice in any
remote state is restricted, suspended, or revoked the
individual shall not be eligible to practice in any remote
state until the individual's privilege to practice is
restored.
SECTION 5. CONDITIONS OF PRACTICE IN A REMOTE STATE
An individual may practice in a remote state under a
privilege to practice only in the performance of the
individual's EMS duties as assigned by an appropriate
authority, as defined in the rules of the Commission, and
under the following circumstances:
1. The individual originates a patient transport in
a home state and transports the patient to a remote state;
2. The individual originates in the home state and
enters a remote state to pick up a patient and provide care
and transport of the patient to the home state;
3. The individual enters a remote state to provide
patient care and/or transport within that remote state;
4. The individual enters a remote state to pick up a
patient and provide care and transport to a third member
state;
5. Other conditions as determined by rules
promulgated by the commission.
SECTION 6. RELATIONSHIP TO EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
ASSISTANCE Compact
Upon a member state's governor's declaration of a
state of emergency or disaster that activates the Emergency
Management Assistance Compact (EMAC), all relevant terms and
provisions of EMAC shall apply and to the extent any terms or
provisions of this Compact conflicts with EMAC, the terms of
EMAC shall prevail with respect to any individual practicing
in the remote state in response to such declaration.
SECTION 7. VETERANS, SERVICE MEMBERS SEPARATING FROM
ACTIVE DUTY MILITARY, AND THEIR SPOUSES
A. Member states shall consider a veteran, active
military service member, and member of the National Guard and
Reserves separating from an active duty tour, and a spouse
thereof, who holds a current valid and unrestricted NREMT
certification at or above the level of the state license being
sought as satisfying the minimum training and examination
requirements for such licensure.
B. Member states shall expedite the processing of
licensure applications submitted by veterans, active military
service members, and members of the National Guard and
Reserves separating from an active duty tour, and their
spouses.
C. All individuals functioning with a privilege to
practice under this Section remain subject to the Adverse
Actions provisions of Section 8.
SECTION 8. ADVERSE ACTIONS
A. A home state shall have exclusive power to impose
adverse action against an individual's license issued by the
home state.
B. If an individual's license in any home state is
restricted or suspended, the individual shall not be eligible
to practice in a remote state under the privilege to practice
until the individual's home state license is restored.
1. All home state adverse action orders shall
include a statement that the individual's Compact privileges
are inactive. The order may allow the individual to practice
in remote states with prior written authorization from both
the home state and remote state's EMS authority.
2. An individual currently subject to adverse action
in the home state shall not practice in any remote state
without prior written authorization from both the home state
and remote state's EMS authority.
C. A member state shall report adverse actions and
any occurrences that the individual's Compact privileges are
restricted, suspended, or revoked to the Commission in
accordance with the rules of the Commission.
D. A remote state may take adverse action on an
individual's privilege to practice within that state.
E. Any member state may take adverse action against
an individual's privilege to practice in that state based on
the factual findings of another member state, so long as each
state follows its own procedures for imposing such adverse
action.
F. A home state's EMS authority shall investigate
and take appropriate action with respect to reported conduct
in a remote state as it would if such conduct had occurred
within the home state. In such cases, the home state's law
shall control in determining the appropriate adverse action.
G. Nothing in this Compact shall override a member
state's decision that participation in an alternative program
may be used in lieu of adverse action and that such
participation shall remain non-public if required by the
member state's laws. Member states must require individuals
who enter any alternative programs to agree not to practice in
any other member state during the term of the alternative
program without prior authorization from such other member
state.
SECTION 9. ADDITIONAL POWERS INVESTED IN A MEMBER
STATE'S EMS AUTHORITY
A member state's EMS authority, in addition to any
other powers granted under state law, is authorized under this
Compact to:
1. Issue subpoenas for both hearings and
investigations that require the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of evidence. Subpoenas issued by
a member state's EMS authority for the attendance and
testimony of witnesses, and/or the production of evidence from
another member state, shall be enforced in the remote state by
any court of competent jurisdiction, according to that court's
practice and procedure in considering subpoenas issued in its
own proceedings. The issuing state EMS authority shall pay any
witness fees, travel expenses, mileage, and other fees
required by the service statutes of the state where the
witnesses and/or evidence are located; and
2. Issue cease and desist orders to restrict,
suspend, or revoke an individual's privilege to practice in
the state.
SECTION 10. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INTERSTATE
COMMISSION FOR EMS PERSONNEL PRACTICE
A. The Compact states hereby create and establish a
joint public agency known as the Interstate Commission for EMS
Personnel Practice.
1. The Commission is a body politic and an
instrumentality of the Compact states.
2. Venue is proper and judicial proceedings by or
against the Commission shall be brought solely and exclusively
in a court of competent jurisdiction where the principal
office of the Commission is located. The Commission may waive
venue and jurisdictional defenses to the extent it adopts or
consents to participate in alternative dispute resolution
proceedings.
3. Nothing in this Compact shall be construed to be
a waiver of sovereign immunity.
B. Membership, Voting, and Meetings
1. Each member state shall have and be limited to
one (1) delegate. The responsible official of the state EMS
authority or his designee shall be the delegate to this
Compact for each member state. Any delegate may be removed or
suspended from office as provided by the law of the state from
which the delegate is appointed. Any vacancy occurring in the
Commission shall be filled in accordance with the laws of the
member state in which the vacancy exists. In the event that
more than one board, office, or other agency with the
legislative mandate to license EMS personnel at and above the
level of EMT exists, the Governor of the state will determine
which entity will be responsible for assigning the delegate.
2. Each delegate shall be entitled to one (1) vote
with regard to the promulgation of rules and creation of
bylaws and shall otherwise have an opportunity to participate
in the business and affairs of the Commission. A delegate
shall vote in person or by such other means as provided in the
bylaws. The bylaws may provide for delegates' participation in
meetings by telephone or other means of communication.
3. The Commission shall meet at least once during
each calendar year. Additional meetings shall be held as set
forth in the bylaws.
4. All meetings shall be open to the public, and
public notice of meetings shall be given in the same manner as
required under the rulemaking provisions in Section 12.
5. The Commission may convene in a closed,
non-public meeting if the Commission must discuss:
a. Non-compliance of a member state with its
obligations under the Compact;
b. The employment, compensation, discipline or other
personnel matters, practices or procedures related to specific
employees or other matters related to the Commission's
internal personnel practices and procedures;
c. Current, threatened, or reasonably anticipated
litigation;
d. Negotiation of contracts for the purchase or sale
of goods, services, or real estate;
e. Accusing any person of a crime or formally
censuring any person;
f. Disclosure of trade secrets or commercial or
financial information that is privileged or confidential;
g. Disclosure of information of a personal nature
where disclosure would constitute a clearly unwarranted
invasion of personal privacy;
h. Disclosure of investigatory records compiled for
law enforcement purposes;
i. Disclosure of information related to any
investigatory reports prepared by or on behalf of or for use
of the Commission or other committee charged with
responsibility of investigation or determination of compliance
issues pursuant to the Compact; or
j. Matters specifically exempted from disclosure by
federal or member state statute.
6. If a meeting, or portion of a meeting, is closed
pursuant to this provision, the Commission's legal counsel or
designee shall certify that the meeting may be closed and
shall reference each relevant exempting provision. The
Commission shall keep minutes that fully and clearly describe
all matters discussed in a meeting and shall provide a full
and accurate summary of actions taken, and the reasons
therefore, including a description of the views expressed. All
documents considered in connection with an action shall be
identified in such minutes. All minutes and documents of a
closed meeting shall remain under seal, subject to release by
a majority vote of the Commission or order of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
C. The Commission shall, by a majority vote of the
delegates, prescribe bylaws and/or rules to govern its conduct
as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes
and exercise the powers of the Compact, including but not
limited to:
1. Establishing the fiscal year of the Commission;
2. Providing reasonable standards and procedures:
a. for the establishment and meetings of other
committees; and
b. governing any general or specific delegation of
any authority or function of the Commission;
3. Providing reasonable procedures for calling and
conducting meetings of the Commission, ensuring reasonable
advance notice of all meetings, and providing an opportunity
for attendance of such meetings by interested parties, with
enumerated exceptions designed to protect the public's
interest, the privacy of individuals, and proprietary
information, including trade secrets. The Commission may meet
in closed session only after a majority of the membership
votes to close a meeting in whole or in part. As soon as
practicable, the Commission must make public a copy of the
vote to close the meeting revealing the vote of each member
with no proxy votes allowed;
4. Establishing the titles, duties and authority,
and reasonable procedures for the election of the officers of
the Commission;
5. Providing reasonable standards and procedures for
the establishment of the personnel policies and programs of
the Commission. Notwithstanding any civil service or other
similar laws of any member state, the bylaws shall exclusively
govern the personnel policies and programs of the Commission;
6. Promulgating a code of ethics to address
permissible and prohibited activities of Commission members
and employees;
7. Providing a mechanism for winding up the
operations of the Commission and the equitable disposition of
any surplus funds that may exist after the termination of the
Compact after the payment and/or reserving of all of its debts
and obligations;
8. The Commission shall publish its bylaws and file
a copy thereof, and a copy of any amendment thereto, with the
appropriate agency or officer in each of the member states, if
any.
9. The Commission shall maintain its financial
records in accordance with the bylaws.
10. The Commission shall meet and take such actions
as are consistent with the provisions of this Compact and the
bylaws.
D. The Commission shall have the following powers:
1. The authority to promulgate uniform rules to
facilitate and coordinate implementation and administration of
this Compact. The rules shall have the force and effect of law
and shall be binding in all member states;
2. To bring and prosecute legal proceedings or
actions in the name of the Commission, provided that the
standing of any state EMS authority or other regulatory body
responsible for EMS personnel licensure to sue or be sued
under applicable law shall not be affected;
3. To purchase and maintain insurance and bonds;
4. To borrow, accept, or contract for services of
personnel, including, but not limited to, employees of a
member state;
5. To hire employees, elect or appoint officers, fix
compensation, define duties, grant such individuals
appropriate authority to carry out the purposes of the
Compact, and to establish the Commission's personnel policies
and programs relating to conflicts of interest, qualifications
of personnel, and other related personnel matters;
6. To accept any and all appropriate donations and
grants of money, equipment, supplies, materials and services,
and to receive, utilize and dispose of the same; provided that
at all times the Commission shall strive to avoid any
appearance of impropriety and/or conflict of interest;
7. To lease, purchase, accept appropriate gifts or
donations of, or otherwise to own, hold, improve or use, any
property, real, personal or mixed; provided that at all times
the Commission shall strive to avoid any appearance of
impropriety;
8. To sell convey, mortgage, pledge, lease,
exchange, abandon, or otherwise dispose of any property real,
personal, or mixed;
9. To establish a budget and make expenditures;
10. To borrow money;
11. To appoint committees, including advisory
committees comprised of members, state regulators, state
legislators or their representatives, and consumer
representatives, and such other interested persons as may be
designated in this Compact and the bylaws;
12. To provide and receive information from, and to
cooperate with, law enforcement agencies;
13. To adopt and use an official seal; and
14. To perform such other functions as may be
necessary or appropriate to achieve the purposes of this
Compact consistent with the state regulation of EMS personnel
licensure and practice.
E. Financing of the Commission
1. The Commission shall pay, or provide for the
payment of, the reasonable expenses of its establishment,
organization, and ongoing activities.
2. The Commission may accept any and all appropriate
revenue sources, donations, and grants of money, equipment,
supplies, materials, and services.
3. The Commission may levy on and collect an annual
assessment from each member state or impose fees on other
parties to cover the cost of the operations and activities of
the Commission and its staff, which must be in a total amount
sufficient to cover its annual budget as approved each year
for which revenue is not provided by other sources. The
aggregate annual assessment amount shall be allocated based
upon a formula to be determined by the Commission, which shall
promulgate a rule binding upon all member states.
4. The Commission shall not incur obligations of any
kind prior to securing the funds adequate to meet the same;
nor shall the Commission pledge the credit of any of the
member states, except by and with the authority of the member
state.
5. The Commission shall keep accurate accounts of
all receipts and disbursements. The receipts and disbursements
of the Commission shall be subject to the audit and accounting
procedures established under its bylaws. However, all receipts
and disbursements of funds handled by the Commission shall be
audited yearly by a certified or licensed public accountant,
and the report of the audit shall be included in and become
part of the annual report of the Commission.
F. Qualified Immunity, Defense, and Indemnification
1. The In accordance with Section 36-1-12, the
members, officers, executive director, employees and
representatives of the Commission shall be immune from suit
and liability, either personally or in their official
capacity, for any claim for damage to or loss of property or
personal injury or other civil liability caused by or arising
out of any actual or alleged act, error or omission that
occurred, or that the person against whom the claim is made
had a reasonable basis for believing occurred within the scope
of Commission employment, duties or responsibilities; provided
that nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to protect
any such person from suit and/or liability for any damage,
loss, injury, or liability caused by the intentional or
willful or wanton misconduct of that person. immune from suit
and liability.
2. The Commission shall defend any member, officer,
executive director, employee or representative of the
Commission in any civil action seeking to impose liability
arising out of any actual or alleged act, error, or omission
that occurred within the scope of Commission employment,
duties, or responsibilities, or that the person against whom
the claim is made had a reasonable basis for believing
occurred within the scope of Commission employment, duties, or
responsibilities; provided that nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit that person from retaining his or her
own counsel; and provided further, that the actual or alleged
act, error, or omission did not result from that person's
intentional or willful or wanton misconduct.
3. The Commission shall indemnify and hold harmless
any member, officer, executive director, employee, or
representative of the Commission for the amount of any
settlement or judgment obtained against that person arising
out of any actual or alleged act, error or omission that
occurred within the scope of Commission employment, duties, or
responsibilities, or that such person had a reasonable basis
for believing occurred within the scope of Commission
employment, duties, or responsibilities, provided that the
actual or alleged act, error, or omission did not result from
the intentional or willful or wanton misconduct of that
person.
SECTION 11. COORDINATED DATABASE
A. The Commission shall provide for the development
and maintenance of a coordinated database and reporting system
containing licensure, adverse action, and significant
investigatory information on all licensed individuals in
member states.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of state law
to the contrary, a member state shall submit a uniform data
set to the coordinated database on all individuals to whom
this Compact is applicable as required by the rules of the
Commission, including:
1. Identifying information;
2. Licensure data;
3. Significant investigatory information;
4. Adverse actions against an individual's license;
5. An indicator that an individual's privilege to
practice is restricted, suspended or revoked;
6. Non-confidential information related to
alternative program participation;
7. Any denial of application for licensure, and the
reason(s) for such denial; and
8. Other information that may facilitate the
administration of this Compact, as determined by the rules of
the Commission.
C. The coordinated database administrator shall
promptly notify all member states of any adverse action taken
against, or significant investigative information on, any
individual in a member state.
D. Member states contributing information to the
coordinated database may designate information that may not be
shared with the public without the express permission of the
contributing state.
E. Any information submitted to the coordinated
database that is subsequently required to be expunged by the
laws of the member state contributing the information shall be
removed from the coordinated database.
SECTION 12. RULEMAKING
A. The Commission shall exercise its rulemaking
powers pursuant to the criteria set forth in this Section and
the rules adopted thereunder. Rules and amendments shall
become binding as of the date specified in each rule or
amendment.
B. If a majority of the legislatures of the member
states rejects a rule, by enactment of a statute or resolution
in the same manner used to adopt the Compact, then such rule
shall have no further force and effect in any member state.
C. Rules or amendments to the rules shall be adopted
at a regular or special meeting of the Commission.
D. Prior to promulgation and adoption of a final
rule or rules by the Commission, and at least sixty (60) days
in advance of the meeting at which the rule will be considered
and voted upon, the Commission shall file a Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking:
1. On the website of the Commission; and
2. On the website of each member state EMS authority
or the publication in which each state would otherwise publish
proposed rules.
E. The Notice of Proposed Rulemaking shall include:
1. The proposed time, date, and location of the
meeting in which the rule will be considered and voted upon;
2. The text of the proposed rule or amendment and
the reason for the proposed rule;
3. A request for comments on the proposed rule from
any interested person; and
4. The manner in which interested persons may submit
notice to the Commission of their intention to attend the
public hearing and any written comments.
F. Prior to adoption of a proposed rule, the
Commission shall allow persons to submit written data, facts,
opinions, and arguments, which shall be made available to the
public.
G. The Commission shall grant an opportunity for a
public hearing before it adopts a rule or amendment if a
hearing is requested by:
1. At least twenty-five (25) persons;
2. A governmental subdivision or agency; or
3. An association having at least twenty-five (25)
members.
H. If a hearing is held on the proposed rule or
amendment, the Commission shall publish the place, time, and
date of the scheduled public hearing.
1. All persons wishing to be heard at the hearing
shall notify the executive director of the Commission or other
designated member in writing of their desire to appear and
testify at the hearing not less than five (5) business days
before the scheduled date of the hearing.
2. Hearings shall be conducted in a manner providing
each person who wishes to comment a fair and reasonable
opportunity to comment orally or in writing.
3. No transcript of the hearing is required, unless
a written request for a transcript is made, in which case the
person requesting the transcript shall bear the cost of
producing the transcript. A recording may be made in lieu of a
transcript under the same terms and conditions as a
transcript. This subsection shall not preclude the Commission
from making a transcript or recording of the hearing if it so
chooses.
4. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
requiring a separate hearing on each rule. Rules may be
grouped for the convenience of the Commission at hearings
required by this section.
I. Following the scheduled hearing date, or by the
close of business on the scheduled hearing date if the hearing
was not held, the Commission shall consider all written and
oral comments received.
J. The Commission shall, by majority vote of all
members, take final action on the proposed rule and shall
determine the effective date of the rule, if any, based on the
rulemaking record and the full text of the rule.
K. If no written notice of intent to attend the
public hearing by interested parties is received, the
Commission may proceed with promulgation of the proposed rule
without a public hearing.
L. Upon determination that an emergency exists, the
Commission may consider and adopt an emergency rule without
prior notice, opportunity for comment, or hearing, provided
that the usual rulemaking procedures provided in the Compact
and in this section shall be retroactively applied to the rule
as soon as reasonably possible, in no event later than ninety
(90) days after the effective date of the rule. For the
purposes of this provision, an emergency rule is one that must
be adopted immediately in order to:
1. Meet an imminent threat to public health, safety,
or welfare;
2. Prevent a loss of Commission or member state
funds;
3. Meet a deadline for the promulgation of an
administrative rule that is established by federal law or
rule; or
4. Protect public health and safety.
M. The Commission or an authorized committee of the
Commission may direct revisions to a previously adopted rule
or amendment for purposes of correcting typographical errors,
errors in format, errors in consistency, or grammatical
errors. Public notice of any revisions shall be posted on the
website of the Commission. The revision shall be subject to
challenge by any person for a period of thirty (30) days after
posting. The revision may be challenged only on grounds that
the revision results in a material change to a rule. A
challenge shall be made in writing, and delivered to the chair
of the Commission prior to the end of the notice period. If no
challenge is made, the revision will take effect without
further action. If the revision is challenged, the revision
may not take effect without the approval of the Commission.
SECTION 13. OVERSIGHT, DISPUTE RESOLUTION, AND
ENFORCEMENT
A. Oversight
1. The executive, legislative, and judicial branches
of state government in each member state shall enforce this
Compact and take all actions necessary and appropriate to
effectuate the Compact's purposes and intent. The provisions
of this Compact and the rules promulgated hereunder shall have
standing as statutory law.
2. All courts shall take judicial notice of the
Compact and the rules in any judicial or administrative
proceeding in a member state pertaining to the subject matter
of this Compact which may affect the powers, responsibilities
or actions of the Commission.
3. The Commission shall be entitled to receive
service of process in any such proceeding, and shall have
standing to intervene in such a proceeding for all purposes.
Failure to provide service of process to the Commission shall
render a judgment or order void as to the Commission, this
Compact, or promulgated rules.
B. Default, Technical Assistance, and Termination
1. If the Commission determines that a member state
has defaulted in the performance of its obligations or
responsibilities under this Compact or the promulgated rules,
the Commission shall:
a. Provide written notice to the defaulting state
and other member states of the nature of the default, the
proposed means of curing the default and/or any other action
to be taken by the Commission; and
b. Provide remedial training and specific technical
assistance regarding the default.
2. If a state in default fails to cure the default,
the defaulting state may be terminated from the Compact upon
an affirmative vote of a majority of the member states, and
all rights, privileges and benefits conferred by this Compact
may be terminated on the effective date of termination. A cure
of the default does not relieve the offending state of
obligations or liabilities incurred during the period of
default.
3. Termination of membership in the Compact shall be
imposed only after all other means of securing compliance have
been exhausted. Notice of intent to suspend or terminate shall
be given by the Commission to the Governor, the majority and
minority leaders of the defaulting state's legislature, and
each of the member states.
4. A state that has been terminated is responsible
for all assessments, obligations, and liabilities incurred
through the effective date of termination, including
obligations that extend beyond the effective date of
termination.
5. The Commission shall not bear any costs related
to a state that is found to be in default or that has been
terminated from the Compact, unless agreed upon in writing
between the Commission and the defaulting state.
6. The defaulting state may appeal the action of the
Commission by petitioning the U.S. District Court for the
District of Columbia or the federal district where the
Commission has its principal offices. The prevailing member
shall be awarded all costs of such litigation, including
reasonable attorney's fees.
C. Dispute Resolution
1. Upon request by a member state, the Commission
shall attempt to resolve disputes related to the Compact that
arise among member states and between member and nonmember
states.
2. The Commission shall promulgate a rule providing
for both mediation and binding dispute resolution for disputes
as appropriate.
D. Enforcement
1. The Commission, in the reasonable exercise of its
discretion, shall enforce the provisions and rules of this
Compact.
2. By majority vote, the Commission may initiate
legal action in the United States District Court for the
District of Columbia or the federal district where the
Commission has its principal offices against a member state in
default to enforce compliance with the provisions of the
Compact and its promulgated rules and bylaws. The relief
sought may include both injunctive relief and damages. In the
event judicial enforcement is necessary, the prevailing member
shall be awarded all costs of such litigation, including
reasonable attorney's fees.
3. The remedies herein shall not be the exclusive
remedies of the Commission. The Commission may pursue any
other remedies available under federal or state law.
SECTION 14. DATE OF IMPLEMENTATION OF THE INTERSTATE
COMMISSION FOR EMS PERSONNEL PRACTICE AND ASSOCIATED RULES,
WITHDRAWAL, AND AMENDMENT
A. The Compact shall come into effect on the date on
which the Compact statute is enacted into law in the tenth
member state. The provisions, which become effective at that
time, shall be limited to the powers granted to the Commission
relating to assembly and the promulgation of rules.
Thereafter, the Commission shall meet and exercise rulemaking
powers necessary to the implementation and administration of
the Compact.
B. Any state that joins the Compact subsequent to
the Commission's initial adoption of the rules shall be
subject to the rules as they exist on the date on which the
Compact becomes law in that state. Any rule that has been
previously adopted by the Commission shall have the full force
and effect of law on the day the Compact becomes law in that
state.
C. Any member state may withdraw from this Compact
by enacting a statute repealing the same.
1. A member state's withdrawal shall not take effect
until six (6) months after enactment of the repealing statute.
2. Withdrawal shall not affect the continuing
requirement of the withdrawing state's EMS authority to comply
with the investigative and adverse action reporting
requirements of this act prior to the effective date of
withdrawal.
D. Nothing contained in this Compact shall be
construed to invalidate or prevent any EMS personnel licensure
agreement or other cooperative arrangement between a member
state and a nonmember state that does not conflict with the
provisions of this Compact.
E. This Compact may be amended by the member states.
No amendment to this Compact shall become effective and
binding upon any member state until it is enacted into the
laws of all member states.
SECTION 15. CONSTRUCTION AND SEVERABILITY
This Compact shall be liberally construed so as to
effectuate the purposes thereof. If this Compact shall be held
contrary to the constitution of any state member thereto, the
Compact shall remain in full force and effect as to the
remaining member states. Nothing in this Compact supersedes
state law or rules related to licensure of EMS agencies.
Section 3. This act shall become effective
immediately following its passage and approval by the
Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.
House of Representatives
Read for the first time and re-
ferred to the House of Representa-
tives committee on State Government
...................................    ....... 16-FEB-17
Read for the second time and placed
on the calendar 1 amendment ......     ....... 06-APR-17
Read for the third time and passed
as amended.........................    ....... 25-APR-17
Yeas 100, Nays 0, Abstains 0
Jeff Woodard
Clerk