HB374
182171-1
By Representative England
RFD: Commerce and Small Business
First Read: 07-MAR-17
182171-1:n:03/07/2017:JMH/mfc LRS2017-438
SYNOPSIS:           Under existing law, Alabama has adopted the
Uniform Condominium Act, which provides provisions
for the creation, management, and termination of a
condominium association.
This bill would make modifications to the
Uniform Condominium Act. This bill would specify
further the rights of the developer and rights of
the unit owner with regard to a condominium that is
part of a condominium association.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
Relating to the Uniform Condominium Act; to amend
Sections 35-8A-102, 35-8A-103, 35-8A-105, 35-8A-106,
35-8A-107, 35-8A-201, 35-8A-205, 35-8A-208, 35-8A-209,
35-8A-210, 35-8A-211, 35-8A-214, 35-8A-215, 35-8A-218,
35-8A-220, 35-8A-302, 35-8A-303, 35-8A-304, 35-8A-305,
35-8A-307, 35-8A-310, 35-8A-311, 35-8A-312, 35-8A-313,
35-8A-314, 35-8A-315, 35-8A-316, 35-8A-317, 35-8A-318,
35-8A-401, 35-8A-402, 35-8A-403, 35-8A-404, 35-8A-406,
35-8A-407, 35-8A-408, 35-8A-409, 35-8A-411, 35-8A-412,
35-8A-413, 35-8A-415, and 35-8A-417 of the Code of Alabama
1975; to provide further for the creation, management, and
termination of a condominium association; and to specify
further the rights of the developer and rights of the unit
owner with regard to a condominium that is part of a
condominium association.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Sections 35-8A-102, 35-8A-103, 35-8A-105,
35-8A-106, 35-8A-107, 35-8A-201, 35-8A-205, 35-8A-208,
35-8A-209, 35-8A-210, 35-8A-211, 35-8A-214, 35-8A-215,
35-8A-218, 35-8A-220, 35-8A-302, 35-8A-303, 35-8A-304,
35-8A-305, 35-8A-307, 35-8A-310, 35-8A-311, 35-8A-312,
35-8A-313, 35-8A-314, 35-8A-315, 35-8A-316, 35-8A-317,
35-8A-318, 35-8A-401, 35-8A-402, 35-8A-403, 35-8A-404,
35-8A-406, 35-8A-407, 35-8A-408, 35-8A-409, 35-8A-411,
35-8A-412, 35-8A-413, 35-8A-415, and 35-8A-417 of the Code of
Alabama 1975, are amended to read as follows:
"§35-8A-102.
"(a) This chapter applies to all condominiums
created within this state after January 1, 1991. Sections
35-8A-104 (Variation by agreement), 35-8A-105 (Separate titles
and taxation), 35-8A-106 (Applicability of local ordinances,
regulations, and building codes), 35-8A-107 (Eminent domain),
35-8A-203 (Construction and validity of declaration and
bylaws), 35-8A-204 (Description of units), 35-8A-302(a)(1)
through (a)(6) and (a)(11) through (a)(16) (Powers of unit
owners' association), 35-8A-311 (Tort and contract liability),
35-8A-316 (Lien for assessments), 35-8A-318 (Association
records), 35-8A-409 (Resales of units), and 35-8A-417
(Substantial completion of units), and Section 35-8A-103
(Definitions), to the extent necessary in construing any of
those sections, apply to all condominiums created in this
state before January 1, 1991; but those sections apply only
with respect to events and circumstances occurring after
January 1, 1991, and do not invalidate existing provisions of
the declaration, bylaws, plats or plans of those condominiums.
"(b) The provisions of Sections 35-8-1 through
35-8-22 do not apply to condominiums created after January 1,
1991, unless the declaration so provides in the case of a
condominium containing four or fewer units and do not
invalidate any amendment to the declaration, bylaws, plats, or
plans of any condominium created before January 1, 1991, if
the amendment would be permitted by this chapter. The
amendment must be adopted in conformity with the procedures
and requirements specified by those instruments and by
Sections 35-8-1 through 35-8-22. If the amendment grants to
any person any rights, powers, or privileges permitted by this
chapter, all correlative obligations, liabilities, and
restrictions in this chapter also apply to that person.
"(c) This chapter does not apply to condominiums or
units located outside this state, but the offering statement
provisions (Sections 35-8A-402 through 35-8A-408) apply to all
contracts for the disposition thereof signed in by a resident
of this state by any party unless: (i) the transaction is
exempt under Section 35-8A-401(b); (ii) the transaction is
exempt pursuant to Section 35-8A-407; or (iii) the state in
which the condominium is located has statutory disclosure
requirements and all terms thereof have been met.
"(d) This chapter does not apply if If a condominium
contains no more than four units and is not subject to any
development rights, unless the declaration provides that the
entire chapter is applicable the condominium may be created
pursuant to this chapter or pursuant to Sections 35-8-1 to
35-8-22, inclusive, and the declaration of condominium shall
declare the chapter that shall govern the condominium.
"§35-8A-103.
"In the declaration and bylaws, unless specifically
provided otherwise or the context otherwise requires, and in
this chapter, the following terms are defined as set forth
below:
"(1) AFFILIATE OF A DECLARANT. Any person who
controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with a
declarant. A person "controls" a declarant if the person (i)
is a general partner, officer, director, or employer of the
declarant, (ii) directly or indirectly or acting in concert
with one or more other persons, or through one or more
subsidiaries, owns, controls, holds with power to vote, or
holds proxies representing more than 20 percent of the voting
interest in the declarant, (iii) controls in any manner the
election of a majority of the directors of the declarant, or
(iv) has contributed more than 20 percent of the capital of
the declarant. A person "is controlled by" a declarant if the
declarant (i) is a general partner, officer, director, or
employer of the person, (ii) directly or indirectly or acting
in concert with one or more other persons, or through one or
more subsidiaries, owns, controls, holds with power to vote,
or holds proxies representing more than 20 percent of the
voting interest in the person, (iii) controls in any manner
the election of a majority of the directors of the person, or
(iv) has contributed more than 20 percent of the capital of
the person. Control does not exist if the powers described in
this paragraph are held solely as security for an obligation
and are not exercised.
"(2) ALLOCATED INTERESTS. The undivided interest in
the common elements, the common expense liability, and votes
in the association allocated to each unit.
"(3) ASSOCIATION or UNIT OWNERS' ASSOCIATION. The
corporation organized under Section 35-8A-301.
"(4) COMMON ELEMENTS. All portions of a condominium
other than the units, and any other interests in real estate
for the benefit of the unit owners which are declared to be
subject to the declaration.
"(5) COMMON EXPENSES. Expenditures made by or
financial liabilities of the association, together with any
allocations to reserves.
"(6) COMMON EXPENSE LIABILITY. The liability for
common expenses allocated to each unit pursuant to Section
35-8A-207.
"(7) CONDOMINIUM. Real estate, portions of which are
designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which
is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of
those portions. Real estate is not a condominium unless the
undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the
unit owners.
"(8) CONVERSION BUILDING. A building that at any
time before creation of the condominium was occupied wholly or
partially by persons other than purchasers and persons who
occupy with the consent of purchasers.
"(9) DECLARANT. Any person or group of persons
acting in concert who (i) as part of a common promotional
plan, who offers to dispose of his or its an interest in a
condominium unit not previously disposed of, or (ii) reserves
or who succeeds to any special declarant right.
"(10) DECLARATION. Any instruments instrument,
however denominated, that create creates a condominium, and
any amendments to those instruments that instrument.
"(11) DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS. Any right or combination
of rights reserved by a declarant in the declaration to: (i)
add real estate to a condominium; (ii) to create units, common
elements, or limited common elements within a condominium;
(iii) to subdivide units or convert units into common elements
or common elements into units; or (iv) to withdraw real estate
from a condominium.
"(12) DISPOSE or DISPOSITION. A voluntary transfer
to a purchaser of any legal or equitable interest title to in
a unit, but does not include the transfer or release of a
security interest.
"(13) BOARD. The body, regardless of name,
designated in the declaration to act on behalf of governing
the association.
"(14) IDENTIFYING NUMBER. A symbol or address
number, letter, or combination thereof that identifies only
one unit in a condominium.
"(15) LEASEHOLD CONDOMINIUM. A condominium in which
all or a portion of the real estate is subject to a lease, the
expiration or termination of which will terminate the
condominium or reduce its size.
"(16) LIMITED COMMON ELEMENT ELEMENTS. A portion of
the common elements allocated by the declaration or by
operation of Section 35-8A-202(2) or (4) for the exclusive use
of by one or more but fewer than all of the units.
"(17) MASTER ASSOCIATION. An organization described
in Section 35-8A-220, whether or not it is also an association
described in Section 35-8A-301.
"(18) OFFERING. Any advertisement, inducement,
solicitation, or attempt to encourage any person to acquire
any interest in a unit, other than as security for an
obligation. An advertisement in a newspaper or other
periodical of general circulation, or in any broadcast medium
to the general public, of a condominium not located in this
state, is not an offering if the advertisement states that an
offering may be made only in compliance with the law of the
jurisdiction in which the condominium is located.
"(19) PERSON. A natural person, corporation,
business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, joint
venture, government, governmental subdivision or agency, or
other legal or commercial entity.
"(20) PURCHASER. Any person, other than a declarant
or a person in the business of selling real estate for his or
her own account, who by means of a voluntary transfer acquires
a legal or equitable interest in a unit other than: (i) a
leasehold interest (including renewal options) of less than 20
years, or (ii) as security for an obligation.
"(21) REAL ESTATE. Any leasehold or other estate or
interest in, over, or under land, including structures,
fixtures, and other improvements and interests which by
custom, usage, or law pass with a conveyance of land though
not described in the contract of sale or instrument of
conveyance. "Real estate" includes parcels with or without
upper or lower boundaries, and spaces that may be filled with
air or water.
"(22) RESIDENTIAL PURPOSES. Use for dwelling or
recreational purposes, or both.
"(23) SECURITY INTEREST. An interest in real estate
or personal property created by contract or conveyance, which
secures payment or performance of an obligation. The term
includes a lien created by a mortgage, vendor's lien, deed of
trust, contract for deed, land sales contract, lease intended
as security, assignment of lease, rents intended as security,
or any similar security device, pledge of an ownership
interest in an association, and any other consensual lien or
title retention contract intended as security for an
obligation.
"(24) SPECIAL DECLARANT RIGHTS. Rights reserved for
the benefit of a declarant (i) to complete improvements
indicated on plats and plans filed with the declaration
(Section 35-8A-209); (ii) to exercise any development right
(Section 35-8A-210); (iii) to maintain sales offices,
management offices, signs advertising the condominium, and
models (Section 35-8A-215); (iv) to use easements through the
common elements for the purpose of making improvements within
the condominium or within real estate which may be added to
the condominium (Section 35-8A-216); (v) to make the
condominium subject to a master association (Section
35-8A-220); (vi) or to appoint or remove any officer of the
association or any master association or any board member
during any period of declarant control (Section 35-8A-303(d)).
"(25) TIME SHARE. A right to occupy a unit or any of
several units during five or more separated time periods over
a period of at least five years, including renewal options,
whether or not coupled with an estate or interest in a
condominium or a specified portion thereof.
"(26) UNIT. A physical portion of the condominium
designated for separate ownership or occupancy, the boundaries
of which are described pursuant to Section 35-8A-205(a)(5).
"(27) UNIT OWNER. A declarant or other person who
owns a unit, or a lessee of the owner of the right to use a
unit in a leasehold condominium whose lease interest expires
simultaneously with any lease interest the expiration or
termination of which will remove the unit from the
condominium, but does not include a person having an interest
in a unit solely as security for an obligation. In a
condominium, the The declarant is the initial unit owner of
any unit created by in the condominium.
"§35-8A-105.
"(a) If there is any unit owner other than a
declarant, each unit that has been created, together with its
interest in the common elements, constitutes for all purposes
a separate parcel of real estate.
"(b) In a condominium where If there is any unit
owner other than a declarant:,
"(1) Each unit that has been created together with
its interest in the common elements, constitutes for all
purposes a separate parcel of real estate; and
"(2) Each each unit must be separately taxed and
assessed, and no separate tax or assessment may be rendered
against any common elements for which a declarant has reserved
no development rights.
"(c) Any portion of the common elements for which
the declarant has reserved any development right must may be
separately taxed and assessed against the declarant, and, if
separately taxed and assessed, the declarant alone is would be
liable for payment of those taxes.
"(d) If there is no unit owner other than a
declarant, the real estate comprising the condominium may be
taxed and assessed in any manner provided by law.
"(e) All laws authorizing exemptions or deductions
from taxation shall be applicable to each individual unit to
the same extent they are applicable to other property.
"§35-8A-106.
"(a) A building code may not impose any requirements
upon any structure in a condominium which it would not impose
upon a physically identical development structure under a
different form of ownership.
"(b) No zoning, subdivision, or other real estate
use law, ordinance, or regulation may prohibit the condominium
form of ownership or impose any requirement upon a condominium
which it would not impose upon a physically identical
development under a different form of ownership.
"(c) Except as provided in subsections (a) and (b),
the provisions of this chapter do not invalidate or modify any
provision of any zoning, subdivision, building code, or other
real estate use law, ordinance, rule, or regulation governing
the use of real estate.
"§35-8A-107.
"(a) If a unit is acquired by eminent domain, or if
part of a unit is acquired by eminent domain leaving the unit
owner with a remnant which may not practically or lawfully be
used for any purpose permitted by the declaration, the award
must compensate the unit owner for the unit and its interest
in the common elements, whether or not any common elements are
acquired. Upon acquisition, unless the decree otherwise
provides, that unit's allocated interests are automatically
reallocated to the remaining units in proportion to the
respective allocated interests of those units before the
taking, and the association shall promptly prepare, execute,
and record an amendment to the declaration reflecting the
reallocations. Any remnant of a unit remaining after part of a
unit is taken under this subsection is thereafter a common
element.
"(b) Except as provided in subsection (a), if part
of a unit is acquired by eminent domain, the award must
compensate the unit owner for the reduction in value of the
unit and its interest in the common elements, whether or not
any common elements are acquired. Upon acquisition, unless the
decree otherwise provides, (i) that unit's allocated interests
are reduced in proportion to the reduction in the size of the
unit, or on any other basis specified in the declaration, and
(ii) the portion of the allocated interests divested from the
partially acquired unit are automatically reallocated to that
unit and the remaining units in proportion to the respective
allocated interests of those units before the taking, with the
partially acquired unit participating in the reallocation on
the basis of its reduced allocated interests.
"(c) If part of the common elements is acquired by
eminent domain the portion of the award attributable to the
common elements taken must be paid to the association. Unless
the declaration provides otherwise, any portion of the award
attributable to the acquisition of a limited common element
must be equally divided among the owners of the units in
accordance with the value of the interest assigned to the unit
in that particular limited common element to which that
limited common element was allocated at the time of
acquisition.
"(d) The court decree shall be recorded in every
county in which any portion of the condominium is located.
"§35-8A-201.
"(a) A condominium may be created pursuant to this
chapter only by filing a declaration executed in the same
manner as a deed with the judge of probate in every county in
which any portion of the condominium is located. A duplicate
of the declaration may be presented to the filing officer
simultaneously for proper validation as to the date filed.
Said duplicate shall be returned to the person who presented
it.
"(b) The judge of probate shall index the
declaration of condominium in the grantee's index in the name
of the condominium and the association and in the grantor's
index in the name of each person executing the declaration. A
well-bound book of suitable size for each condominium to be
known as "Condominium Book No." shall be maintained by the
judge of probate. Such book shall contain a copy of the
declaration of condominium, all drawings, amendments,
certificate of completion, certificate of termination, or
other like instruments.
"(c) A declaration or an amendment to a declaration
adding units to a condominium, may not be recorded is not
effective unless all structural components and mechanical
systems of all buildings containing or comprising any units
thereby created are substantially completed in accordance with
the plans complete, as evidenced by a recorded certificate of
substantial completion of structural and mechanical systems
executed by an independent registered engineer or independent
registered architect.
"§35-8A-205.
"(a) The declaration for a condominium must contain:
"(1) The name of the condominium, which must include
the word "condominium" or be followed by the words "a
condominium," and the name of the association;
"(2) The name of every county in which any part of
the condominium is situated;
"(3) A legally sufficient description of the real
estate included in the condominium;
"(4) A statement of the maximum number of units
which the declarant reserves the right to create;
"(5) A description of the boundaries of each unit
created by the declaration, including the unit's identifying
number;
"(6) A description of any limited common elements,
other than those specified in Section 35-8A-202(2) and (4), as
provided in Section 35-8A-209(b)(10);
"(7) A description of any real estate common
elements (except real estate subject to development rights)
which may be allocated subsequently as limited common
elements, other than limited common elements specified in
Section 35-8A-202(2) and (4), together with a statement that
they may be so allocated;
"(8) A description of any development rights
specified in Section 35-8A-103(11) and other special declarant
rights specified in Section 35-8A-103(24) reserved by the
declarant, together with a legally sufficient description of
the real estate to which each of those rights applies, and a
time limit within which each of those rights must be
exercised;
"(9) If any development right may be exercised with
respect to different parcels of real estate at different
times, a statement to that effect together with (i) either a
statement fixing the boundaries of those portions and
regulating the order in which those portions may be subjected
to the exercise of each development right, or a statement that
no assurances are made in those regards, and (ii) a statement
as to whether, if any development right is exercised in any
portion of the real estate subject to that development right,
that development right must be exercised in all or in any
other portion of the remainder of that real estate;
"(10) Any other conditions or limitations under
which the rights described in subdivision (8) may be exercised
or will lapse;
"(11) An allocation to each unit of the allocated
interests in the manner described in Section 35-8A-207;
"(12) Any restrictions on (i) use, occupancy,
leasing, or alienation of the units, provided that reasonable
rules and regulations related to conduct by unit owners or
esthetic aesthetic considerations which are adopted by the
association from time to time need not be included in the
declaration, and (ii) the amount for which a unit may be sold
or the amount that may be received by a unit owner on sale,
condemnation, casualty loss to the unit or to the condominium,
or on the termination of the condominium;
"(13) The recording data for recorded easements and
licenses appurtenant to or included in the condominium or to
which any portion of the condominium is or may become subject
by virtue of a reservation in the declaration;
"(14) A statement of the number and identity of
units which the declarant reserves the right to dispose of in
time shares; and
"(15) All matters required by Sections 35-8A-206
through 35-8A-209, 35-8A-215, 35-8A-216, and 35-8A-303(d).
"(b) The declaration may contain any other matters
the declarant deems appropriate.
"§35-8A-208.
"(a) Except for the limited common elements
described in Section 35-8A-202(2) and (4), the declaration
must specify to which unit or units each limited common
element is allocated. An allocation may not be altered without
the consent of the association and the unit owners whose units
are affected by the amendment.
"(b) Except as the declaration otherwise provides, a
limited common element may be reallocated by an amendment to
the declaration executed by the unit owners between or among
whose units the reallocation is made. The persons executing
the amendment shall provide it to the association, which shall
prepare, execute, and record it the amendment which is subject
to Section 35-8A-217(e), and the cost shall be borne by the
persons unit owners executing the amendment. The amendment
shall be recorded and indexed in the names of the parties and
unit owners executing the amendment, the condominium, and the
association.
"(c) A common element not previously allocated as a
limited common element may not be so allocated except pursuant
to provisions in the declaration made in accordance with
Section 35-8A-205(a)(7). The allocations must be made by
amendments to the declaration.
"§35-8A-209.
"(a) Plats and plans are a part of the declaration.
Separate plats and plans are not required by this chapter if
all the information required by this section is contained in
either a plat or plan. Each plat and plan must be clear and
legible and A clear and legible plat of the condominium
property and plans, if required under subsection (d), shall be
recorded in the office of the judge of probate in every county
in which any portion of the condominium is located and shall
contain a certification that the plat or plan and plans, if
any contain all information required by this section. If the
plat contains all of the information required by this section
described in subsections (b), (c), (d), and (g), plans are not
required. The recorded plan and plans are part of the
declaration.
"(b) Each plat must show:
"(1) The name of the condominium and a survey or
general schematic map of the entire of the real property
included in the condominium;
"(2) The location and dimensions of all real estate
not subject to development rights, or subject only to the
development right to withdraw, and the location and dimensions
of all existing improvements within that real estate located
on the condominium property;
"(3) A legally sufficient description The location
and dimensions of any real estate subject to development
rights reserved over any part of the condominium property,
labeled to identify the rights applicable to each parcel
identified portion, but the plat need not designate or label
which development rights are applicable if that information is
clearly described in the declaration;
"(4) The extent of any encroachments by or upon any
portion of the condominium property;
"(5) To the extent feasible, a legally sufficient
description any easements can be shown on the plat, the
location and dimensions of all easements serving or burdening
any portion of the condominium property;
"(6) The To the extent they can be shown on the
plat, the location and dimensions of any vertical unit
boundaries not shown or projected on plans recorded pursuant
to subsection (d) and that unit's and the identifying number
of each unit;
"(7) The location To the extent they can be shown on
the plat, any horizontal unit boundaries with reference to an
established datum of any horizontal unit boundaries not shown
or projected on plans recorded pursuant to subsection (d) and
that unit's and the identifying number of each unit;
"(8) To the extent they can be shown on the plat,
the location and dimensions of any limited common elements
other than parking spaces and the limited common elements
described in subdivisions (2) and (4) of Section 35-8A-202;
"(8) (9) A legally sufficient description of any
real estate in which the unit owners will own only an estate
for years, labeled as "leasehold real estate";
"(9) (10) The distance between noncontiguous parcels
of real estate comprising property included in the
condominium;
"(10) The location and dimensions of limited common
elements, including porches, balconies, and patios, other than
parking spaces and the other limited common elements described
in Section 35-8A-202(2) and (4);
"(11) In the case of real estate not subject to
development rights, all other matters customarily shown on
land surveys.
"(12) (11) A certification as to whether any portion
of the real property subject to contained in the condominium
is located within a flood zone as determined by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development federal
agency charged with implementation of the National Flood
Insurance Act and, if so, the flood zone classification. When
any portion of the condominium property is located within a
flood zone, the flood zone boundary shall be shown on the
plat, together with the elevations and locations of all
proposed existing structures to be located within the flood
zone area.;
"(c) A plat may also show the (12) The intended
location and dimensions of any contemplated improvement or
proposed improvements to be constructed anywhere within on the
condominium property pursuant to any development right. Any
contemplated improvement shown, which must be clearly labeled
either "MUST BE BUILT" or "NEED NOT BE BUILT.; and"
"(13) All other matters customarily shown on land
surveys.
"(c) A general schematic map or a legal description
of any real property that may be added to the condominium in
the future pursuant to a development right reserved under
Section 35-8A-205(a)(8) must either be included in the
declaration or shown on an additional page of the plat. If the
additional real property is shown on the plat, it must be
clearly labeled that it is not part of the condominium
property.
"(d) To the extent not shown or projected contained
on the plats plat of the condominium property, plans of the
units must show or project condominium property improvements
must be prepared and recorded that show:
"(1) The location and dimensions of the vertical
boundaries of each unit, and that unit's the identifying
number for each unit;
"(2) Any horizontal unit boundaries, with reference
to an established datum, and that unit's the identifying
number for each unit; and
"(3) Any The location and dimensions of any limited
common elements other than parking spaces and the limited
common elements described in subdivisions (2) and (4) of
Section 35-8A-202; and
"(4) The location and dimensions of any units in
which the declarant has reserved the right to create
additional units or common elements described in Section
35-8A-210(c) identified appropriately, unless the development
rights are adequately described in the declaration.
"(e) Unless the declaration provides otherwise, the
horizontal boundaries of any part of a unit located outside of
a building have the same elevation as the horizontal
boundaries of the inside part the building, and need not be
depicted on the plats and plans.
"(f) Upon exercising any development right that
affects the condominium property, the declarant shall record
either new plats and plans necessary to conform to the
requirements of subsections (a), (b), and (d) above, or new
certifications of the plats and plans previously recorded if
those plats and plans otherwise conform to the requirements of
those subsections.
"(g) Any certification of a plat or plan required by
this section or Section 35-8A-201(b) must be made by an
independent a registered engineer or, a registered architect,
or a licensed surveyor.
"§35-8A-210.
"(a) To exercise any development right reserved
under Section 35-8A-205(a)(8), the declarant shall prepare,
execute, and record an amendment to the declaration as
specified in Section 35-8A-217 and comply with Section
35-8A-209. The declarant is the unit owner of any units
thereby created. The amendment to the declaration must assign
an identifying number to each new unit created, and, except in
the case of subdivision or conversion of units described in
subsection (b) subdivision (2) of subsection (c), reallocate
the allocated interests among all units. The amendment must
describe any common elements and any limited common elements
thereby created and, in the case of limited common elements,
designate the unit to which each is allocated to the extent
required by Section 35-8A-208.
"(b) Development rights may be reserved within any
real estate added to the condominium if the amendment adding
that real estate includes all matters required by Section
35-8A-205 or 35-8A-206, as the case may be, and the plats and
plans include all matters required by Section 35-8A-209. This
provision does not extend the time limit on the exercise of
development rights imposed by the declaration pursuant to
Section 35-8A-205(a)(8).
"(c) Whenever a declarant exercises a development
right to subdivide or convert a unit previously created into
additional units, common elements, or both:
"(1) If the declarant converts the unit entirely to
common elements, the amendment to the declaration must
reallocate all the allocated interests of that unit among the
other units as if that unit had been taken by eminent domain;
and
"(2) If the declarant subdivides the unit into two
or more units, whether or not any part of the unit is
converted into common elements, the amendment to the
declaration must reallocate all the allocated interests of the
unit among the units created by the subdivision in any
reasonable manner prescribed by the declarant.
"(d) If the declaration provides, pursuant to
Section 35-8A-205(a)(8), that all or a portion of the real
estate is subject to the development right of withdrawal:
"(1) If all the real estate is subject to
withdrawal, and the declaration does not describe separate
portions of real estate subject to that right, none of the
real estate may be withdrawn after a unit has been conveyed to
a purchaser; and
"(2) If a portion or portions are subject to
withdrawal, no portion may be withdrawn after a unit in that
portion has been conveyed to a purchaser.
"§35-8A-211.
"Subject to the provisions of the declaration and
other provisions of law, a unit owner:
"(1) May make any improvements or alterations to his
or her unit that do not impair the structural integrity, or
mechanical systems, or lessen the support of any portion of
the condominium;
"(2) May not substantially or adversely change the
appearance of the common elements, or the exterior appearance
of a unit or any other portion of the condominium, without
permission of the association;
"(3) After acquiring an adjoining unit, or an
adjoining part of an adjoining unit, may remove or alter any
intervening partition or create apertures therein, even if the
partition in whole or in part is a common element, if those
acts do not impair the structural integrity or mechanical
systems or lessen the support of any portion of the
condominium. Removal of partitions or creation of apertures
under this subdivision is not an alteration of boundaries.
"§35-8A-214.
"The existing physical boundaries of a unit or the
physical boundaries of a unit reconstructed in substantial
accordance with the original plats and plans thereof become
its boundaries rather than the metes and bounds expressed in
the deed or plat or plan, regardless of settling or lateral
movement of the building, or minor variance between boundaries
shown on the plats or plans or in the deed and those of the
building. This section does not relieve a unit owner of
liability in case of his or her willful misconduct nor relieve
a declarant or any other person of liability for failure to
adhere to the plats and plans.
"§35-8A-215.
"A declarant may maintain sales offices, management
offices, and models in units or on common elements in the
condominium only if the declaration so provides and specifies
the rights of a declarant with regard to the number, size,
location, and relocation thereof. Any sales office, management
office, or model not designated a unit by the declaration is a
common element, and if a declarant ceases to be a unit owner,
he or she ceases to have any rights with regard thereto unless
it is removed promptly from the condominium in accordance with
a right to remove reserved in the declaration. Subject to any
limitations in the declaration, a declarant may maintain signs
on the common elements advertising the condominium. The
provisions of this section are subject to the provisions of
other state law, and to local ordinances.
"§35-8A-218.
"(a) Except in the case of a taking of all the units
by eminent domain specified in Section 35-8A-107, a
condominium may be terminated only by agreement of unit owners
of units to which at least 80 percent of the votes in the
association are allocated, or any larger percentage the
declaration specifies. The declaration may specify a smaller
percentage only if all of the units in the condominium are
restricted exclusively to nonresidential uses.
"(b) An agreement to terminate must be evidenced by
the execution of a termination agreement, or ratifications
thereof, in the same manner as a deed, by the requisite number
of unit owners. The termination agreement must specify a date
after which the agreement will be void unless it is recorded
before that date. A termination agreement and all
ratifications thereof must be recorded in every county in
which a portion of the condominium is situated, and is
effective only upon recordation.
"(c) In the case of a condominium containing only
units having horizontal boundaries described in the
declaration, a termination agreement may provide that all the
common elements and units of the condominium shall be sold
following termination. If, pursuant to the agreement, any real
estate in the condominium is to be sold following termination,
the termination agreement must set forth the minimum terms of
the sale.
"(d) In the case of a condominium containing any
units not having horizontal boundaries described in the
declaration, a termination agreement may provide for sale of
the common elements, but may not require that the units be
sold following termination, unless the declaration as
originally recorded provided otherwise or unless all the unit
owners consent to the sale.
"(e) The association, on behalf of the unit owners,
may contract for the sale of real estate in the condominium,
but the contract is not binding on the unit owners until
approved pursuant to subsections (a) and (b). If any real
estate in the condominium is to be sold following termination,
title to that real estate, upon termination, vests in the
association as trustee for the holders of all interests in the
units. Thereafter, the association has all powers necessary
and appropriate to effect the sale. Until the sale has been
concluded and the proceeds thereof distributed, the
association continues in existence with all powers it had
before termination. Proceeds of the sale must be distributed
to unit owners and lien holders as their interests may appear,
in accordance with subsections (i), (j), and (k). Unless
otherwise specified in the termination agreement, as long as
the association holds title to the real estate, each unit
owner and his or her successors in interest have an exclusive
right to occupancy of the portion of the real estate that
formerly constituted his or her unit. During the period of
that occupancy, each unit owner and his or her successors in
interest remain liable for all assessments and other
obligations imposed on unit owners by this chapter or the
declaration.
"(f) If the real estate constituting the condominium
is not to be sold following termination, title to the common
elements and, in a condominium containing only units having
horizontal boundaries described in the declaration, title to
all the real estate in the condominium, vests in the unit
owners upon termination as tenants in common in proportion to
their respective interests as provided in subsection (h), and
liens on the units shift accordingly. While the tenancy in
common exists, each unit owner and his or her successors in
interest have an exclusive right to occupancy of the portion
of the real estate that formerly constituted his or her unit.
"(g) Following termination of the condominium, the
proceeds of any sale of real estate, together with the assets
of the association, are held by the association as trustee for
unit owners and holders of liens on the units as their
interests may appear.
"(h) Following termination, creditors of the
association holding liens on the units which were recorded
before termination, may enforce those liens in the same manner
as any lien holder. All other creditors of the association are
to be treated as if they had perfected liens on the units
immediately before termination.
"(i) The respective interests of unit owners
referred to in subsections (e), (f), (g), and (h) are as
follows:
"(1) Except as provided in subdivision (2), the
respective interests of unit owners are the fair market values
of their units, limited common elements, and common element
interests immediately before the termination, as determined by
one or more independent appraisers selected by the
association. The decision of the independent appraisers shall
be distributed to the unit owners and becomes final unless
disapproved within 30 days after distribution by unit owners
of units to which 25 percent of the votes in the association
are allocated. The proportion of any unit owner's interest to
that of all unit owners is determined by dividing the fair
market value of that unit and common element interest by the
total fair market values of all the units and common elements.
"(2) If any unit or any limited common element is
destroyed to the extent that an appraisal of the fair market
value thereof before destruction cannot be made, the interests
of all unit owners are their respective common element
interests immediately before the termination.
"(j) Except as provided in subsection (k),
foreclosure or enforcement of a lien or encumbrance against
the entire condominium does not of itself terminate the
condominium, and foreclosure or enforcement of a lien or
encumbrance against a portion of the condominium, other than
withdrawable real estate, does not withdraw that portion from
the condominium. Foreclosure or enforcement of a lien or
encumbrance against withdrawable real estate does not of
itself withdraw that real estate from the condominium, but the
person taking title thereto has the right to require from the
association, upon request, an amendment excluding the real
estate from the condominium.
"(k) If a lien or encumbrance against a portion of
the real estate comprising the condominium has priority over
the declaration, and the lien or encumbrance has not been
partially released, the parties foreclosing the lien or
encumbrance may upon foreclosure, record an instrument
excluding the real estate subject to that lien or encumbrance
from the condominium.
"§35-8A-220.
"(a) If the declaration for a condominium provides
that any of the powers described in Section 35-8A-302 are to
be exercised by or may be delegated to a profit or nonprofit
corporation which exercises those or other powers on behalf of
one or more condominiums or for the benefit of the unit owners
of one or more condominiums, all provisions of this chapter
applicable to unit owners' associations apply to any such
corporation with regard to such delegated power except as
modified by this section.
"(b) Unless it is acting in the capacity of an
association described in Section 35-8A-301, a master
association may exercise the powers set forth in Section
35-8A-302(a)(2) only to the extent expressly permitted in the
declarations of condominiums which are part of the master
association or expressly described in the delegations of power
from those condominiums to the master association.
"(c) If the declaration of any condominium provides
that the board may delegate certain powers to a master
association, the members of the board have no liability for
the acts or omissions of the master association with respect
to those powers following delegation.
"(d) The rights and responsibilities of unit owners
with respect to the unit owners' association set forth in
Sections 35-8A-303, 35-8A-308 through 35-8A-310, and 35-8A-312
apply in the conduct of the affairs of a master association
only to those persons who elect the board of a master
association, whether or not those persons are otherwise unit
owners within the meaning of this chapter.
"(e) Even if a master association is also an
association described in Section 35-8A-301, the certificate of
incorporation or other instrument creating the master
association and the declaration of each condominium the powers
of which are assigned by the declaration or delegated to the
master association, may provide that the executive board of
the master association must be elected after the period of
declarant control in any of the following ways:
"(1) All unit owners of all condominiums subject to
the master association may elect all members of that executive
board.
"(2) All members of the executive boards of all
condominiums subject to the master association may elect all
members of that executive board.
"(3) All unit owners of each condominium subject to
the master association may elect specified members of that
executive board.
"(4) All members of the executive board of each
condominium subject to the master association may elect
specified members of that executive board.
"§35-8A-302.
"(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), and
subject to the provisions of the declaration, the association
may:
"(1) Adopt and amend bylaws and rules and
regulations, except that an association may not adopt a bylaw
or enforce an existing bylaw to restrict an owner from
renovating or decorating the interior walls, ceiling, or floor
of his or her unit in a manner that does not substantially
alter the exterior appearance of the condominium;
"(2) Adopt and amend budgets for revenues,
expenditures, and reserves and impose and collect assessments
for common expenses from unit owners;
"(3) Hire and discharge managing agents and other
employees, agents, and independent contractors;
"(4) Institute, defend, or intervene in litigation
or administrative proceedings in its own name on behalf of
itself or two or more unit owners on matters affecting the
condominium;
"(5) Make contracts and incur liabilities;
"(6) Regulate the use, maintenance, repair,
replacement, and modification of common elements;
"(7) Cause additional improvements to be made as a
part of the common elements;
"(8) Acquire, hold, encumber, and convey in its own
name any right, title, or interest to real or personal
property, but interests in the common elements other than
those set forth in subdivision (9) may be conveyed or
subjected to a security interest only pursuant to Section
35-8A-312;
"(9) Grant easements, encroachments, leases,
licenses, and concessions through or over the common elements;
"(10) Impose and receive any payments, fees, or
charges for the use, rental, or operation of the common
elements, other than limited common elements described in
Section 35-8A-202(2) and (4), and for services provided to
unit owners;
"(11) Impose against owners of units charges for
late payment of assessments and, after notice and an
opportunity to be heard, levy reasonable fines for violations
of the declaration, bylaws, and rules and regulations of the
association;
"(12) Impose reasonable charges for the preparation
and recordation of amendments to the declaration, resale
certificates required by Section 35-8A-409, or statements of
unpaid assessments;
"(13) Provide for the indemnification of its
officers and board and maintain directors' and officers'
liability insurance;
"(14) Assign its right to future income, including
the right to receive common expense assessments, but only to
the extent the declaration expressly so provides, or as
required to secure a loan that is otherwise allowed or
provided for in the governing documents;
"(15) Exercise any other powers conferred by the
declaration or bylaws;
"(16) Exercise all other powers that may be
exercised in this state by legal entities of the same type as
the association; and
"(17) Exercise any other powers necessary and proper
for the governance and operation of the association.
"(b) The declaration may not impose limitations on
the power of the association to deal with the declarant which
are more restrictive than the limitations imposed on the power
of the association to deal with other persons.
"§35-8A-303.
"(a) Except as provided in the declaration, the
bylaws, the articles of incorporation in subsection (b), or
other provisions of this chapter, the board may act in all
instances on behalf of the association. In the performance of
their duties, the officers and members of the board are
required to exercise (i) if appointed by the declarant, the
care required of fiduciaries of the unit owners other than the
declarant and (ii) if elected by the unit owners other than
declarant, ordinary and reasonable care.
"(b) The board may not act on behalf of the
association to amend the declaration as specified in Section
35-8A-217, to terminate the condominium described in Section
35-8A-218, or to elect members of the board or to determine
the qualifications, powers and duties, or terms of office of
board members as provided in Section 35-8A-303(f), but the
board may fill vacancies in its membership for the unexpired
portion of any term.
"(c) Within 30 days after adoption of any proposed
budget for the condominium, the board shall provide a copy of
the budget to all the unit owners, and shall set a date for a
meeting of the unit owners to consider ratification of the
budget not less than 14 10 nor more than 30 50 days after
delivery or mailing of the budget to the unit owners. Unless
at that meeting a majority of all the unit owners present in
person or by proxy or any larger vote specified in the
declaration reject the budget, the budget is ratified, whether
or not a quorum is present. In the event the proposed budget
is rejected, the periodic budget last ratified by the unit
owners shall be continued until such time as the unit owners
ratify a subsequent budget proposed by the board.
"(d) Subject to subsection (e), the declaration may
provide for a period of declarant control of the association,
during which period a declarant, or persons designated by him
or her, may appoint and remove the officers and members of the
board. Regardless of the period provided in the declaration, a
period of declarant control terminates no later than the
earliest of (i) 60 days after conveyance of 75 percent of the
units which may be created to unit owners other than a
declarant; (ii) two years after all declarants have ceased to
offer units for sale in the ordinary course of business; or
(iii) two years after any development right to add new units
was last exercised. A declarant may voluntarily surrender the
right to appoint and remove officers and members of the board
before termination of that period, but in that event he or she
may require, for the duration of the period of declarant
control, that specified actions of the association or board,
as described in a recorded instrument executed by the
declarant, be approved by the declarant before they become
effective.
"(e) Not later than 90 days after conveyance of 25
percent of the units which may be created to unit owners other
than a declarant, at least one member and not less than 25
percent of the members of the board must be elected by unit
owners other than the declarant. Not later than 90 days after
conveyance of 50 percent of the units which may be created to
unit owners other than a declarant, not less than 33 1/3
percent of the members of the board must be elected by unit
owners other than the declarant.
"(f) Except as otherwise provided in Section
35-8A-220(e), not later than the termination of any period of
declarant control, the unit owners shall elect a board of at
least three members, at least a majority of whom must be unit
owners other than declarant. The board shall elect the
officers. The board members and officers shall take office
upon election.
"(g) Notwithstanding any provision of the
declaration or bylaws to the contrary, the unit owners, by a
two-thirds vote of all persons present in person and entitled
to vote at any meeting of the unit owners at which a quorum in
person is present, may remove any member of the board with or
without cause, other than a member appointed by the declarant.
"§35-8A-304.
"(a) No special declarant right specified in Section
35-8A-103(24) created or reserved under this chapter may be
transferred except by an instrument evidencing the transfer
recorded in every county in which any portion of the
condominium is located. The instrument is not effective unless
executed by the transferor and the transferee in the same
formality as a conveyance of real property.
"(b) Upon transfer of any special declarant right,
the liability of a transferor declarant is as follows:
"(1) A transferor is not relieved of any obligation
or liability arising before the transfer and remains liable
for warranty obligations imposed upon him or her by this
chapter. Lack of privity does not deprive any unit owner of
standing to maintain an action to enforce any obligation of
the transferor.
"(2) If a successor to any special declarant right
is an affiliate of a declarant specified in Section
35-8A-103(1), the transferor is jointly and severally liable
with the successor for any obligations or liabilities of the
successor relating to the condominium.
"(3) If a transferor retains any special declarant
right, but transfers other special declarant rights to a
successor who is not an affiliate of the declarant, the
transferor is liable for any obligations or liabilities
imposed on a declarant by this chapter or by the declaration
relating to the retained special declarant rights and arising
after the transfer.
"(4) A transferor has no liability for any act or
omission or any breach of a contractual or warranty obligation
arising from the exercise of a special declarant right by a
successor declarant who is not an affiliate of the transferor.
"(c) Unless otherwise provided in a mortgage
instrument or deed of trust or other agreement creating a
security interest, in case of foreclosure of a security
interest, sale by a trustee under an agreement creating a
security interest, tax sale, judicial sale, or sale under
federal bankruptcy law or receivership proceedings, of any
units owned by a declarant or real estate in a condominium
subject to development rights, a person acquiring title to all
the real estate being foreclosed or sold succeeds to all
special declarant rights related to that real estate held by
that declarant, or only to any rights reserved in the
declaration pursuant to Section 35-8A-215 and held by that
declarant to maintain models, sales offices and signs.
"(d) Upon foreclosure of a security interest, sale
by a trustee under an agreement creating a security interest,
tax sale, judicial sale, or sale under federal bankruptcy law
or receivership proceedings, of all units and other real
estate in a condominium owned by a declarant:
"(1) The declarant ceases to have any special
declarant rights, and
"(2) The period of declarant control specified in
Section 35-8A-303(d) terminates unless the judgment or
instrument conveying title provides for transfer of all
special declarant rights held by that declarant to a successor
declarant.
"(e) The liabilities and obligations of a person who
succeeds to special declarant rights are as follows:
"(1) A successor to any special declarant right who
is an affiliate of a declarant is subject to all obligations
and liabilities imposed on the transferor by this chapter or
by the declaration.
"(2) A successor to any special declarant right,
other than a successor described in subdivisions (3) or (4),
who is not an affiliate of a declarant, is subject to all
obligations and liabilities imposed by this chapter or the
declaration:
"a. On a declarant which relates to his or her
exercise or nonexercise of special declarant rights; or
"b. On his or her transferor, other than:
"1. Misrepresentations by any previous declarant;
"2. Warranty obligations on improvements made by any
previous declarant, or made before the condominium was
created;
"3. Breach of any fiduciary obligation by any
previous declarant or his or her appointees to the board; or
"4. Any liability or obligation imposed on the
transferor as a result of the transferor's acts or omissions
after the transfer.
"(3) A successor to only a right reserved in the
declaration to maintain models, sales offices, and signs
pursuant to Section 35-8A-215, may not exercise any other
special declarant right, and is not subject to any liability
or obligation as a declarant, except the obligation to provide
an offering statement and any liability arising as a result
thereof.
"(4) A successor to all special declarant rights
held by his or her transferor who is not an affiliate of that
declarant and who succeeded to those rights pursuant to a deed
in lieu of foreclosure or a judgment or instrument conveying
title to units under subsection (c), may declare the intention
in a recorded instrument to hold those rights solely for
transfer to another person. Thereafter, until transferring all
special declarant rights to any person acquiring title to any
unit owned by the successor, or until recording an instrument
permitting exercise of all those rights, that successor may
not exercise any of those rights other than any right held by
his or her transferor to control the board in accordance with
the provisions of Section 35-8A-303(d) for the duration of any
period of declarant control, and any attempted exercise of
those rights is void. So long as a successor declarant may not
exercise special declarant rights under this subsection, he or
she is not subject to any liability or obligation as a
declarant other than liability for his or her acts and
omissions under Section 35-8A-303(d).
"(f) Nothing in this section subjects any successor
to a special declarant right to any claims against or other
obligations of a transferor declarant, other than claims and
obligations arising under this chapter or the declaration.
"§35-8A-305.
"If entered into before the board elected by the
unit owners pursuant to Section 35-8A-303(f) takes office, (i)
any management contract, employment contract, or lease of
recreational or parking areas or facilities, (ii) any other
contract or lease between the association and a declarant or
an affiliate of a declarant, or (iii) any contract or lease
that is not bona fide or was unconscionable to the unit owners
at the time entered into under the circumstances then
prevailing, may be terminated without penalty by the
association at any time during the current term of the
contract or lease after the board elected by the unit owners
pursuant to Section 35-8A-303(f) takes office upon not less
than 90 days' notice to the other party. This section does not
apply to any lease the termination of which would terminate
the condominium or reduce its size, unless the real estate
subject to that lease was included in the condominium for the
purpose of avoiding the right of the association to terminate
a lease under this section.
"§35-8A-307.
"(a) Except to the extent provided by the
declaration, subsection (b), or Section 35-8A-313(h), the
association is responsible for maintenance, repair, and
replacement of the common elements, and each unit owner is
responsible for maintenance, repair, and replacement of his or
her unit. Each unit owner shall afford to the association and
the other unit owners, and to their agents or employees,
access through his or her unit reasonably necessary for those
purposes. If damage is inflicted on the common elements, or on
any unit through which access is taken, the unit owner
responsible for the damage, or the association if it is
responsible, is liable for the prompt repair thereof.
"(b) In addition to the liability that a declarant
as a unit owner has under this chapter, the declarant alone is
liable for all expenses in connection with real estate subject
to development rights. No other unit owner and no other
portion of the condominium is subject to a claim for payment
of those expenses. Unless the declaration provides otherwise,
any income or proceeds from real estate subject to development
rights inures to the declarant.
"§35-8A-310.
"(a) If only one of the multiple owners of a unit is
present at a meeting of the association, he or she is entitled
to cast all the votes allocated to that unit. If more than one
of the multiple owners are present, the votes allocated to
that unit may be cast only in accordance with the agreement of
a majority in interest of the multiple owners, unless either
the declaration or bylaws expressly provides otherwise. There
is majority agreement if any one of the multiple owners casts
the votes allocated to that unit without protest being made
promptly to the person presiding over the meeting by any of
the other owners of the unit.
"(b) Votes allocated to a unit may be cast pursuant
to a proxy duly executed by the unit owner except as provided
in Section 35-8A-303(g). If a unit is owned by more than one
person, each owner of the unit may vote or register protest to
the casting of votes by the other owners of the unit through a
duly executed proxy. A unit owner may not revoke a proxy given
pursuant to this section except by actual notice of revocation
to the person presiding over a meeting of the association. A
proxy is void if it is not dated or purports to be revocable
without notice. A proxy terminates one year after its date,
unless it specifies a shorter term.
"(c) If the declaration requires that votes on
specified matters affecting the condominium be cast by lessees
rather than unit owners of leased units: (i) the provisions of
subsection subsections (a) and (b) apply to lessees as if they
were unit owners; (ii) unit owners who have leased their units
to other persons may not cast votes on those specified
matters; and (iii) lessees are entitled to notice of meetings,
access to records, and other rights respecting those matters
as if they were unit owners. Unit owners must also be given
notice, in the manner provided in Section 35-8A-308, of all
meetings at which lessees may be entitled to vote.
"(d) No votes allocated to a unit owned by the
association may be cast.
"§35-8A-311.
"Neither the association, any association mortgagee,
nor any unit owner except the declarant is liable for that
declarant's torts in connection with any part of the
condominium which that declarant has the responsibility to
maintain. Otherwise, an action alleging a wrong done by the
association shall be brought against the association and not
against any unit owner. If the wrong occurred during any
period of declarant control and the association gives the
declarant reasonable notice of and an opportunity to defend
against the action, the declarant who then controlled the
association is liable to the association or to any unit owner:
(i) for all tort losses not covered by insurance suffered by
the association or that unit owner, and (ii) for all costs
which the association would not have incurred but for a breach
of contract or other wrongful act or omission. Whenever the
declarant is liable to the association under this section, the
declarant is also liable for all reasonable litigation
expenses, including reasonable attorneys fees, incurred by the
association. Any statute of limitation affecting the
association's right of action under this section is tolled
until the period of declarant control terminates. A unit owner
is not precluded from bringing an action contemplated by this
section solely because he or she is a unit owner, or a member
or officer of the association. Liens resulting from judgments
against the association are governed by Section 35-8A-317.
"§35-8A-312.
"(a) In a condominium portions of the common
elements may be conveyed or subjected to a security interest
by the association if persons entitled to cast at least 80
percent of the votes in the association, including 80 percent
of the votes allocated to units not owned by a declarant, or
any larger percentage the declaration specifies, agree to that
action; but all the owners of units to which any limited
common element is allocated must agree in order to convey that
limited common element or subject it to a security interest.
The declaration may specify a smaller percentage only if all
of the units are restricted exclusively to nonresidential
uses. Proceeds of the sale or loan are an asset of the
association.
"(b) An agreement to convey common elements in a
condominium or subject them to a security interest must be
evidenced by the execution of an agreement, or ratifications
thereof, in the same manner as a deed, by the requisite number
of unit owners. The agreement must specify a date after which
the agreement will be void unless recorded before that date.
The agreement and all ratifications thereof must be recorded
in every county in which a portion of the condominium is
situated, and is effective only upon recordation.
"(c) The association, on behalf of the unit owners,
may contract to convey an interest in a condominium pursuant
to subsection (a), but the contract is not enforceable against
the association until approved pursuant to subsections (a) and
(b). Thereafter, the association has all powers necessary and
appropriate to effect the conveyance or encumbrance, including
the power to execute deeds or other instruments.
"(d) Any purported conveyance, encumbrance, judicial
sale or other voluntary transfer of common elements, unless
made pursuant to this section, is void.
"(e) A conveyance or encumbrance of common elements
pursuant to this section does not deprive any unit of its
rights of access and support.
"(f) Unless the declaration otherwise provides, a
conveyance or encumbrance of common elements pursuant to this
section does not affect the priority or validity of
pre-existing encumbrances.
"§35-8A-313.
"(a) Commencing not later than the time of the first
conveyance of a unit to a person other than a declarant, the
association shall maintain, to the extent reasonably
available:
"(1) Property insurance on the common elements
insuring against all risks of direct physical loss commonly
insured against or, in the case of a conversion building,
against fire and extended coverage perils. The total amount of
insurance after application of any deductibles shall be not
less than the greater of 80 percent of the actual cash value
of the insured property at the time the insurance is purchased
or such greater percentage of such actual cash value as may be
necessary to prevent the applicability of any co-insurance
provision and at each renewal date, exclusive of land,
excavations, foundations and other items normally excluded
from property policies; and
"(2) Liability insurance, including medical payments
insurance, in an amount determined by the board but not less
than any amount specified in the declaration, covering all
occurrences commonly insured against for death, bodily injury,
and property damage arising out of or in connection with the
use, ownership, or maintenance of the common elements.
"(b) In the case of a building containing units
having horizontal boundaries described in the declaration, the
insurance maintained under subdivision (a)(1), to the extent
reasonably available, must include the units, but need not
include improvements and betterments installed by unit owners.
"(c) If the insurance described in subsections (a)
and (b) is not reasonably available, the association promptly
shall cause notice of that fact to be hand-delivered or sent
prepaid by United States mail to all unit owners. The
declaration may require the association to carry any other
insurance, and the association in any event may carry any
other insurance it deems appropriate to protect the
association or the unit owners.
"(d) Insurance policies carried pursuant to
subsection (a) must provide that:
"(1) Each unit owner is an insured person under the
policy with respect to liability arising out of his or her
interest in the common elements or membership in the
association;
"(2) The insurer waives its right to subrogation
under the policy against any unit owner or member of his or
her household;
"(3) No act or omission by any unit owner, unless
acting within the scope of his or her authority on behalf of
the association, will void the policy or be a condition to
recovery under the policy; and
"(4) If, at the time of a loss under the policy,
there is other insurance in the name of a unit owner covering
the same risk covered by the policy, the association's policy
provides primary insurance.
"(e) Any loss covered by the property policy under
subsections (a)(1) and (b) must be adjusted with the
association, but the insurance proceeds for that loss are
payable to any insurance trustee designated for that purpose,
or otherwise to the association, and not to any holder of a
security interest. The insurance trustee or the association
shall hold any insurance proceeds in trust for unit owners and
lien holders as their interests may appear. Subject to the
provisions of subsection (h), the proceeds must be disbursed
first for the repair or restoration of the damaged property,
and the association unit owners and lien holders are not
entitled to receive payment of any portion of the proceeds
unless there is a surplus of proceeds after the property has
been completely repaired or restored, or the condominium is
terminated.
"(f) An insurance policy issued to the association
does not prevent a unit owner from obtaining insurance for his
or her own benefit.
"(g) An insurer that has issued an insurance policy
under this section shall issue certificates or memoranda of
insurance to the association and, upon written request, to any
unit owner, or holder of a security interest. The insurer
issuing the policy may not cancel or refuse to renew it until
30 days after notice of the proposed cancellation or
nonrenewal has been mailed to the association, each unit owner
and each mortgagee or beneficiary under a deed of trust to
whom a certificate or memorandum of insurance has been issued
at their respective last known addresses.
"(h) Any portion of the condominium for which
insurance is required under this section which is damaged or
destroyed must be repaired or replaced promptly by the
association unless:
"(1) The condominium is terminated, in which case
Section 35-8A-218 applies,
"(2) Repair or replacement would be illegal under
any state or local statute or ordinance governing health or
safety, or
"(3) Eighty percent of the unit owners, including
every owner of a unit or assigned limited common element which
will not be rebuilt, vote not to rebuild. The cost of repair
or replacement in excess of insurance proceeds, including any
deductible or retention under any contract of insurance, and
reserves is a common expense.
"If the entire condominium is not repaired or
replaced, (i) the insurance proceeds attributable to the
damaged common elements must be used to restore the damaged
area to a condition compatible with the remainder of the
condominium, (ii) except to the extent that other persons will
be distributees under Section 35-8A-205(a)(12)(ii),
"(1) The insurance proceeds attributable to units
and limited common elements which are not rebuilt must be
distributed to the owners of those units and the owners of the
units to which those limited common elements were allocated,
or to lienholders, as their interests may appear, and
"(2) The remainder of the proceeds must be
distributed to all the unit owners or lienholders, as their
interests may appear, in proportion to the common element
interests of all the units.
"If the unit owners vote not to rebuild any unit,
that unit's allocated interests are automatically reallocated
upon the vote as if the unit had been condemned under Section
35-8A-107(a), and the association promptly shall prepare,
execute, and record an amendment to the declaration reflecting
the reallocations.
"(i) The provisions of this section may be varied or
waived in the case of a condominium all of whose units are
restricted to nonresidential use.
"(j) Unless the declaration provides otherwise, the
association shall pay any cost in excess of insurance
proceeds, including any deductible or retention under any
contract of insurance as a common expense.
"§35-8A-314.
"Unless otherwise provided in the declaration or
bylaws, any surplus funds of the association remaining after
payment of or provision for common expenses and any prepayment
of reserves must be paid to the unit owners in proportion to
their common expense liabilities or credited to them to reduce
their future common expense assessments, or held in reserve.
"§35-8A-315.
"(a) Until the association makes a common expense
assessment, the declarant must pay all common expenses. After
any assessment has been made by the association, assessments
must be made at least annually, based on a budget adopted at
least annually by the association.
"(b) Except for assessments under subsections (c),
(d), and (e), all common expenses must be assessed against all
the units in accordance with the allocations set forth in the
declaration pursuant to Section 35-8A-207(a) and (b). Any past
due common expense assessment or installment thereof bears
interest at the rate established by the association not
exceeding 18 percent per year.
"(c) To the extent required by the declaration:
"(1) Any common expense associated with the
maintenance, repair, or replacement of a limited common
element must be assessed against the units to which that
limited common element is assigned, equally, or in any other
proportion that the declaration provides;
"(2) Any common expense or portion thereof
benefiting fewer than all of the units must be assessed
exclusively against the units benefited; and
"(3) The costs of insurance must be assessed in
proportion to risk and the costs of utilities must may be
assessed in proportion to usage.
"(d) Assessments to pay a judgment against the
association under Section 35-8A-317(a) may be made only
against the units in the condominium at the time the judgment
was entered, in proportion to their common expense
liabilities.
"(e) If any common expense is caused by the
misconduct of any unit owner or such unit owner's invitee, the
association may assess that expense exclusively against his or
her unit after notice and an opportunity to be heard.
"(f) If common expense liabilities are reallocated,
common expense assessments and any installment thereof not yet
due shall be recalculated in accordance with the reallocated
common expense liabilities.
"(g) All assessments, including utilities, fees, and
other charges shall also constitute the personal obligation of
the unit owner to the association.
"(h) No unit owner other than the association shall
be exempted from any liability for any assessment under this
code section or under any condominium instrument for any
reason whatsoever, including, without limitation, abandonment,
nonuse, or waiver of the use or enjoyment of his or her unit
or any part of the common elements.
"§35-8A-316.
"(a) The association has a lien on a unit for any
assessment and any other moneys due the association for
special assessments or services or charges, such as water or
repairs, levied against that unit or fines imposed against its
unit owner from the time the assessment or fine becomes due is
levied. The association's lien may be foreclosed in like
manner as a mortgage on real estate but the and as provided in
the declaration and in Section 35-10-11 or Article 1A of
Chapter 10 of this title and subject to the right under
Article 14A of Chapter 5 of Title 6. The association shall
give send reasonable advance notice of its proposed action to
the unit owner and all lienholders of record of who have
provided a notice address in the record instrument evidencing
the lien on the unit. Unless the declaration otherwise
provides, fees, charges, late charges, fines, and interest
charged pursuant to Section 35-8A-302(a)(10), (11), and (12)
are enforceable as assessments under this section. If an
assessment is payable in installments, the full amount of the
assessment is a lien from the time the first installment
thereof becomes due it is levied.
"(b) A lien under this section is prior to all other
liens and encumbrances on a unit except (i) liens and
encumbrances recorded before the recordation of the
declaration, (ii) a first security interest on the unit
recorded before the date on which the assessment sought to be
enforced became delinquent, and (iii) liens for real estate
taxes and other governmental assessments or charges against
the unit. The lien is also prior to the mortgages and deeds of
trust described in clause (ii) above to the extent of the
common expense assessments based on the periodic budget
adopted by the association pursuant to Section 35-8A-315(a)
which would have become due in the absence of acceleration
during the six months immediately preceding institution of an
action to enforce the lien. This subsection does not affect
the priority of mechanics' or materialmen's liens, or the
priority of liens for other assessments made by the
association. The lien under this section is not subject to the
provisions of homestead or other exemptions.
"(c) Unless the declaration otherwise provides, if
two or more associations have liens for assessments created at
any time on the same real estate, those liens have equal
priority.
"(d) Recording of the declaration constitutes record
notice and perfection of the lien. No further recordation of
any claim of lien for assessment under this section is
required.
"(e) A lien for unpaid assessments is extinguished
unless proceedings to enforce the lien are instituted within
three years after the full amount of the assessments becomes
due.
"(f) This section does not prohibit actions to
recover sums for which subsection (a) creates a lien or
prohibit an association from taking a deed in lieu of
foreclosure.
"(g) A judgment or decree in any action brought
under this or the preceding section must include costs and
reasonable attorney's fees actually incurred for to the
prevailing party.
"(h) Any unit owner, mortgagee of a unit, person
having executed a contract for the purchase of a condominium
unit, or lender considering the loan of funds to be secured by
a condominium unit shall be entitled upon request to a
statement from the association or its management agent setting
forth the amount of assessments levied against the unit,
including information regarding whether such assessments are
past due, and unpaid together with late charges and interest
applicable thereto against that condominium unit. Such request
shall be in writing, shall be delivered to the registered
office of the association, and shall state an address to which
the statement is to be directed. Failure on the part of the
association to mail or otherwise furnish such statement
regarding amounts due and payable if specified in the written
request therefor within 10 business days from the receipt of
such request releases the association's lien against the unit
for the amount of the assessment as of that date, but does not
discharge the unit owner's debt to the association. The
information specified in such statement shall be binding upon
the association and upon every unit owner. Payment of a
reasonable fee not exceeding $10.00 may be required as a
prerequisite to the issuance of such a statement if the
condominium instruments so provide.
"§35-8A-317.
"(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), a
judgment for money against the association if recorded is not
a lien on the common elements, but is a lien in favor of the
judgment lienholder against all of the units in the
condominium at the time the judgment was entered. No other
property of a unit owner is subject to the claims of creditors
of the association.
"(b) If the association has granted a security
interest in the common elements to a creditor of the
association pursuant to Section 35-8A-312, the holder of that
security interest shall exercise its right against the common
elements before its judgment lien on any unit may be enforced.
"(c) Whether perfected before or after the creation
of the condominium, if a lien other than a deed of trust or
mortgage, including a judgment lien or lien attributable to
work performed or materials supplied before creation of the
condominium, becomes effective against two or more units, the
unit owner of an affected unit may pay to the lienholder the
amount of the lien attributable to his or her unit, and the
lienholder, upon receipt of payment, promptly shall deliver a
release of the lien covering that unit. The amount of the
payment must be proportionate to the ratio which that unit
owner's common expense liability bears to the common expense
liabilities of all unit owners whose units are subject to the
lien. After payment, the association may not assess or have a
lien against that unit owner's unit for any portion of the
common expenses incurred in connection with that lien.
"(d) A judgment against the association must be
indexed in the name of the condominium and the association
and, when so indexed, is notice of the lien against the units.
"§35-8A-318.
"The association shall keep financial records
sufficiently detailed to enable the association to comply with
Section 35-8A-409. All financial and other records shall be
made reasonably available for examination by any unit owner
and his or her authorized agents and such records shall be
made available in the county where the condominium is located.
A reasonable fee or hourly charge may be assessed for this
service.
"§35-8A-401.
"(a) This article applies to all units subject to
this chapter, except as provided in subsection (b) or as
modified or waived in writing by agreement of purchasers of
units in a condominium in which all units are restricted to
nonresidential use.
"(b) Neither an offering statement nor a resale
certificate need be prepared or delivered in the case of:
"(1) A gratuitous disposition of a unit;
"(2) A transfer pursuant to court order;
"(3) A disposition by a government or governmental
agency;
"(4) A transfer by foreclosure or disposition by
deed in lieu of foreclosure;
"(5) A disposition to a person in the business of
selling real estate who intends to offer those units to
purchasers where the responsibility for preparing and
delivering the offering statement has been transferred to the
person pursuant to subsection (b) of Section 35-8A-402;
"(6) A disposition that may be canceled at any time
and for any reason by the purchaser without penalty; or
"(7) A disposition of a time share interest in a
unit.
"§35-8A-402.
"(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), a
declarant, prior to the offering of any interest in a unit to
the public, shall prepare an offering statement conforming to
the requirements of Sections 35-8A-403 through 35-8A-406.
"(b) A declarant may transfer responsibility for
preparation of all or a part of the offering statement to a
successor declarant specified in Section 35-8A-304 or to a
person in the business of selling real estate who intends to
offer units in the condominium for his the offeror's own
account. In the event of any such transfer, the transferor
shall provide the transferee with any information necessary to
enable the transferee to fulfill the requirements of
subsection (a).
"(c) Any declarant or other person in the business
of selling real estate who offers to a purchaser a unit for
his the offeror's own account to a purchaser whom such
responsibility for preparation and delivery of an offering
statement has been transferred shall deliver an offering
statement in the manner prescribed in Section 35-8A-408(a) and
is liable under Sections 35-8A-408 and 35-8A-417 35-8A-414 for
any false or misleading statement set forth therein or for any
omission of material fact.
"(d) If a unit is part of a condominium and is part
of any other real estate regime in connection with the sale of
which the delivery of an offering statement is required under
the laws of this state, a single offering statement conforming
to the requirements of Sections 35-8A-403 through 35-8A-406 as
those requirements relate to each regime in which the unit is
located, and to any other requirements imposed under the laws
of this state, may be prepared and delivered in lieu of
providing two or more offering statements.
"§35-8A-403.
"(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), an
offering statement must contain or fully and accurately
disclose the following information with regard to the
condominium, including a proposed condominium:
"(1) The name and principal address of the declarant
and of the condominium;
"(2) The name and the address, legal description, or
other description of the location of the condominium, and the
number and types of units in the condominium;
"(3) A general description of the condominium,
including to the extent possible, the types, number and types
of buildings, structures, and amenities the declarant is
obligated to build, and declarant's schedule of commencement
and completion of construction of buildings, structures, and
amenities that declarant anticipates including in the
condominium; The number of units is obligated to include in
the condominium;
"(4) Copies of the declaration, other than the plats
and plans, as well as any other recorded plats, plans,
easements, covenants, conditions, restrictions, and
reservations affecting the condominium; the bylaws, and
certificate or the proposed certificate of formation and the
bylaws of the association created or to be created to manage
the condominium, any rules or regulations of the association;
, a copy of the lease for any leasehold condominium, copies of
any contracts and leases to be signed by purchasers at
closing, and copies of any contracts or leases that will or
may be subject to cancellation by the association under
Section 35-8A-305;
"(5) Any current balance sheet and a A projected
budget for the association, either within or as an exhibit to
the offering statement, for at least one year after the date
or anticipated date of the first conveyance to a purchaser,
and thereafter the current budget along with the current
balance sheet of the association, a statement of who prepared
the budget, and a statement of the budget's assumption
concerning occupancy. The budget must include, without
limitation:
"a. A statement of the amount, or a statement that
there is no amount, included in the budget as a reserve for
repairs and replacement;
"b. A statement of any other reserves included in
the budget;
"c. The projected common expense assessment expenses
by category of expenditures for the association; and
"d. The projected monthly common expense assessment
for each type of unit;
"(6) Any services not reflected in the budget that
the declarant provides, or expenses that he or she pays, and
that he or she expects may become at any subsequent time a
common expense of the association and the projected common
expense assessment attributable to each of those services or
expenses for the association and for each type of unit;
"(7) Any initial or special fee due from the
purchaser at closing together with a description of the
purpose and method of calculating the fee;
"(8) A reference to, and a brief description of, any
liens, known defects, or encumbrances on or affecting the
title to the condominium;
"(9) A description of any financing offered or
arranged by the declarant and if the contract of sale offered
to the purchaser does not contain a provision conditioning
purchaser's obligation to perform the contract on obtaining
financing, a statement that the purchaser will forfeit any
deposit he or she has paid if the purchaser requires such
financing but does not qualify for such financing as is
offered or arranged by declarant;
"(10) The terms and significant limitations of any
warranties provided by the declarant, including statutory
warranties provided in this chapter and limitations on the
enforcement thereof or on damages;
"(11) A statement that:
"a. Within seven days after receipt of an offering
statement a purchaser, before conveyance, may cancel any
contract for purchase of a unit from a declarant,;
"b. If a declarant fails to provide an offering
statement to a purchaser before conveying a unit, that
purchaser may rescind the conveyance within seven days after
first receiving the offering statement,; and
"c. If a purchaser receives the public offering
statement more than seven days before signing a contract, he
or she cannot cancel the contract;
"(12) A statement of any unsatisfied judgments or
pending suits lawsuits against the association; and the status
of any pending suits lawsuits material to the condominium of
which a declarant has actual knowledge;
"(13) A statement that any deposit made in
connection with the purchase of a unit will be held in an
escrow account until closing and will be returned to the
purchaser if the purchaser cancels the contract pursuant to
Section 35-8A-408, together with the name and address of the
escrow agent;
"(14) Any restraints on sale or lease of any units
in the condominium and any restrictions:
"a. On use, occupancy or alienation of the units,
and
"b. On the amount for which a unit may be sold or on
the amount that may be received by a unit owner on sale,
condemnation, casualty loss to the unit or to the condominium
or on the termination of the condominium;
"(15) A brief description of the insurance coverage
provided for the benefit of unit owners;
"(16) Any current or expected fees or charges to be
paid by unit owners for the use of the common elements and
other facilities related to the condominium;
"(17) The extent to which financial arrangements
have been provided for completion of all improvements that the
declarant is obligated to build pursuant to Section 35-8A-416
(Declarant's obligation to complete and restore);
"(18) A brief narrative description of any zoning
affecting the condominium; and
"(19) The applicable amendment requirements as
provided in the declaration or as provided by Alabama law.
"(b) If a condominium composed of not more than 12
units is not subject to any development rights, and no power
is reserved to a declarant to make the condominium part of a
larger condominium, group of condominiums, or other real
estate, an offering statement may but need not include the
information otherwise required by subdivisions (9), (10),
(15), (16), (17), and (18) of subsection (a).
"(c) A declarant shall promptly amend the offering
statement to report any material change in the information
required by this section.
"§35-8A-404.
"If the declaration provides that a condominium is
subject to any development rights, the offering statement must
disclose, in addition to the information required by Section
35-8A-403:
"(1) The maximum number of units, and the maximum
number of units per acre, that may be created;
"(2) A statement of how many or what percentage of
the units which may be created will be restricted exclusively
to residential use, or a statement that no representations are
made regarding use restrictions;
"(3) If any of the units that may be built within
real estate subject to development rights are not to be
restricted exclusively to residential use, a statement, with
respect to each portion of that real estate, of the as to
whether there is a maximum percentage of the real estate
areas, and the maximum percentage of the floor areas of all
units that may be created therein, that are not restricted
exclusively to residential use units which may be used for
nonresidential purposes;
"(4) A statement of any development rights reserved
by a declarant and of any conditions relating to or
limitations upon the exercise of development rights;
"(5) A statement of the maximum extent to which each
unit's the allocated interests of each unit may be changed by
the exercise of any development right described in subdivision
(3) (4);
"(6) A statement of the extent to which any
buildings or other improvements that may be erected pursuant
to any development right in any part of the condominium will
be compatible with existing buildings and improvements in the
condominium in terms of architectural style, quality of
construction, and size, or a statement that no assurances are
made in those regards;
"(7) General descriptions of all other improvements
that may be made and limited common elements that may be
created within any part of the condominium pursuant to any
development right reserved by the declarant, or a statement
that no assurances are made in that regard;
"(8) A statement of any limitations as to the
locations of any building or other improvement that may be
made within any part of the condominium property that may be
added to the condominium pursuant to any development right
reserved by the declarant, or a statement that no assurances
are made in that regard;
"(9) A statement that any common elements or limited
common elements created pursuant to any development right
reserved by the declarant will be of the same general types
and sizes as the common elements and the limited common
elements within other parts of the condominium, or a statement
of the types and sizes planned, or a statement that no
assurances are made in that regard;
"(10) A statement that the proportion of limited
common elements to units created pursuant to any development
right reserved by the declarant will be approximately equal to
the proportion existing within other parts of the condominium,
or a statement of any other assurances in that regard, or a
statement that no assurances are made in that regard;
"(11) A statement that all restrictions in the
declaration affecting use, occupancy, and sale or lease of
units will apply to any units created pursuant to any
development right reserved by the declarant, or a statement of
any differentiations that may be made as to those units, or a
statement that no assurances are made in that regard; and
"(12) A statement of the extent to which any
assurances made pursuant to this section apply or do not apply
in the event that any development right is not exercised by
the declarant.
"§35-8A-406.
"The offering statement of a condominium containing
any conversion building containing units that may be occupied
for residential use must contain, in addition to the
information required by Section 35-8A-402 Section 35-8A-403:
"(1) A statement by the declarant, to the best of
declarant's knowledge, of the approximate age of structural
components and mechanical and electrical installations which
are material to the use and enjoyment of the buildings or an
affirmative statement in bold face print that no
representations are made in that regard and;
"(2) A list of any outstanding notices of uncured
violations of building code or other municipal regulations,
together with the estimated cost of curing those violations.
"§35-8A-407.
"If an interest in a condominium is currently
registered with the securities and exchange commission
Securities and Exchange Commission of the United States or
registered pursuant to the Interstate Land Sales Full
Disclosure Act, a declarant satisfies all requirements
relating to the preparation and delivery of an offering
statement of this chapter if he or she delivers to the
purchaser a copy of the offering statement filed with the
securities and exchange commission Securities and Exchange
Commission or a copy of the property report approved in
accordance with the Interstate Land Sales Full Disclosure Act
as a part of the registration process.
"§35-8A-408.
"(a) A person required to deliver an offering
statement the required documents or report pursuant to Section
35-8A-402(c) or 35-8A-407 shall provide a purchaser of a unit
with a copy of the offering statement and all amendments
thereto before conveyance of that unit, and not later than the
date of any contract of sale. Unless a purchaser is given the
offering statement required documents more than seven days
before execution of a contract for the purchase of a unit, the
purchaser may cancel the contract, or rescind the conveyance
if a conveyance has already occurred, within seven days after
first receiving the offering statement required documents or
report.
"(b) If a purchaser elects to cancel a contract or
conveyance pursuant to subsection (a), he or she may do so by
hand-delivering notice thereof to the offeror or by mailing
notice thereof by prepaid United States mail to the offeror or
to his or her agent for service of process. Cancellation is
without penalty, and all payments made by the purchaser before
cancellation shall be refunded promptly.
"(c) If a person required to deliver an offering
statement or report pursuant to Section 35-8A-402(c) or
35-8A-407 fails to provide a purchaser to whom a unit is
conveyed with that offering statement and all amendments
thereto as the documents required by subsection (a), the
purchaser, at the purchaser's option and in lieu of any rights
to damages or other relief, is entitled to receive from that
person an amount equal to five percent of the sales price of
the unit at anytime prior to the expiration of six months from
if the purchaser provides notice of the election to that
person in the same manner as described in subsection (b)
within six months of the date of conveyance of the unit, plus
five percent of the share, proportionate to his common expense
liability, of any indebtedness of the association secured by
security interests encumbering the condominium.
"§35-8A-409.
"(a) Except in the case of a sale where delivery of
an offering statement is required, or unless exempt under
Section 35-8A-401(b), a unit owner upon written request by the
purchaser a purchaser of a unit previously disposed of, which
written request must be made within 14 days of the date the
purchaser signs the contract with a purchaser, shall furnish
to a purchaser before the conveyance and in any event within
15 days of receipt of the written request, a copy of the
declaration, other than the plats and plans, the bylaws, the
rules or, and the regulations of the association, and a
certificate containing:
"(1) A statement setting forth the amount of the
monthly periodic common expense assessment and;
"(2) A statement setting forth the amount of any
unpaid common expense or special assessment currently due and
payable from the selling unit owner assessments against the
unit either past due or then due owing;
"(2) A statement of any other fees payable by unit
owners;
"(3) A statement of any other assessments or fees
assessed against the unit or the unit owner either past due or
then due and owing;
"(3) (4) The most recent regularly prepared balance
sheet, and income and expense statement, if any, or any other
reports regularly prepared showing cash flow of the
association;
"(4) (5) The current operating budget of the
association;
"(5) (6) A statement of any unsatisfied judgments
against the association and any pending suit in which the
association is a party;
"(6) (7) A statement describing any insurance
coverage provided for the benefit of unit owners;
"(7) (8) A statement of the remaining term of any
lease hold leasehold estate affecting the condominium and the
provisions governing any extension or renewal thereof; and
"(8) (9) A statement of any restrictions in the
declaration affecting the amount that may be received by a
unit owner upon sale, condemnation, casualty loss to the unit
or condominium or on termination of the condominium.
"(b) The association, within 10 days after a request
by a unit owner, shall furnish a certificate containing the
above listed information necessary to enable the unit owner to
comply with this section. A unit owner providing a certificate
pursuant to subsection (a) is not liable to the purchaser for
any erroneous information provided by the association and
included in the certificate.
"(c) A purchaser who receives a copy of the
certificate prepared by the association is not liable after
closing for any unpaid assessment assessments or fee fees
greater than the amount set forth in the certificate prepared
by the association. A The unit owner is not liable to a
purchaser for the failure or delay of the association to
provide the certificate in a timely manner, but accordance
with the time set forth in subsection (b). If the purchaser
timely requested the information in accordance with subsection
(a), the purchase contract is remains voidable by the
purchaser until the certificate requested information has been
provided and for five days thereafter or until conveyance,
whichever first occurs.
"§35-8A-411.
"(a) In the case of a sale of a unit where delivery
of an offering statement is required pursuant to Section
35-8A-402(c) or a disclosure is made pursuant to Section
35-8A-407, a seller shall before conveying a unit, (i) record
or furnish to the purchaser releases of all liens or an
agreement to release any liens that encumber that unit and its
common element interest, except liens on real estate that a
declarant has the right to withdraw from the condominium, that
the purchaser does not expressly agree in a written contract
of sale which specifically identifies such lien and its amount
to take subject to or assume and that encumber a condominium,
that unit and its common element interest, or (ii), or provide
a surety bond or substitute collateral for or insurance
against the lien in the manner provided for liens on real
estate in Section 35-11-233(b).
"(b) Before In conveying real estate to the
association the declarant shall have that real estate released
from: (i) all liens the foreclosure of which would deprive
unit owners of any right of access to or easement of support
of their units, and (ii) all other liens on that real estate
unless the offering statement describes certain real estate
which may be conveyed subject to liens in specified amounts.
"§35-8A-412.
"(a) A declarant of a condominium containing
conversion buildings, and any person in the business of
selling real estate for his or her own account who intends to
offer units in such a condominium shall give each of the
residential tenants and any residential subtenant in
possession of a portion of a conversion building notice of the
conversion no later than 60 days before the tenants and any
subtenant in possession are required to vacate. The notice
must set forth generally the rights of tenants and subtenants
under this section and shall be hand-delivered to the unit or
mailed by prepaid United States mail to the tenant and
subtenant at the address of the unit or any other mailing
address provided by a tenant. No tenant or subtenant may be
required to vacate upon less than 60 days' notice, except by
reason of nonpayment of rent, waste, or conduct that disturbs
other tenants' peaceful enjoyment of the premises, and the
terms of the tenancy may not be altered during that period.
Failure to give notice as required by this section is a
defense to an action for possession.
"(b) If a notice of conversion specifies a date by
which a unit or proposed unit must be vacated, and otherwise
complies with the provisions of Section 35-9-80 Chapter 9A,
the notice also constitutes a notice to terminate specified by
that statute.
"(c) Nothing in this section permits termination of
a lease by a declarant in violation of the terms of the lease.
"§35-8A-413.
"(a) Express warranties made by declarant, his an
affiliate of the declarant, and or any person in the business
of selling real estate for his or her own account, to a
purchaser of a unit, if relied upon by the purchaser, are
created as follows:
"(1) Any affirmation of material fact or material
promise which relates to the unit, its use, or rights
appurtenant thereto, improvements to the condominium that
would directly benefit the unit, or the right to use or have
the benefit of facilities not located in the condominium,
creates an express warrant warranty that the unit and related
rights and uses will conform to the affirmation or promise;
"(2) Any model or description of the physical
characteristics of the condominium, including plans and
specifications of or for improvements, creates an express
warranty that the condominium will substantially conform to
the model or description;
"(3) Any description of the quantity or extent of
the real estate comprising the condominium, including plats or
surveys, creates an express warranty that the condominium will
conform to the description, subject to customary tolerances;
and
"(4) A provision statement that a buyer may put a
unit only to a specified use is an express warranty that the
specified use is lawful.
"(b) Neither formal words, such as "warranty" or
"guarantee," nor a specific intention to make a warranty, are
necessary to create an express warranty of quality, but a
statement purporting to be merely an opinion or commendation
of the real estate or its value does not create a warranty.
"§35-8A-415.
"No promotional material may be displayed or
delivered to prospective purchasers which describes or
portrays an improvement that the declarant is not obligated to
build unless the description or portrayal of the improvement
that is not in existence and is displayed in the promotional
material is conspicuously labeled or identified as, "NEED NOT
BE BUILT."
"§35-8A-417.
"In the case of a sale of a unit where delivery of
an offering statement is required or a disclosure is made
pursuant to Section 35-8A-407, a contract of sale may be
executed, but no interest in that unit may be conveyed, or
voted until the declaration is recorded and the unit is
substantially completed, as evidenced by a recorded
certificate of substantial completion executed by an
independent registered architect, or independent registered
engineer, or by issuance of a certificate of occupancy
authorized by law."
Section 2. This act shall become effective on
January 1, 2018.