SB279
182900-1
By Senator Shelnutt
RFD: Banking and Insurance
First Read: 07-MAR-17
182900-1:n:02/23/2017:JMH/tgw LRS2017-899
SYNOPSIS:           This bill would authorize financial
institutions that do business in the state to
conduct savings promotion contests for members and
customers of the financial institution for the
purpose of encouraging depositors to maintain
savings accounts and increase personal savings.
This bill would specify that the offering of a
savings promotion contest is not a lottery within
the meaning of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
To authorize financial institutions that do business
in the state to conduct savings promotion contests; to specify
the conditions under which a financial institution may conduct
a savings promotion contest; to authorize the appropriate
federal or state regulatory agency of the financial
institution to oversee the conduct of any savings promotion
contest conducted by it; and to specify that the offering of a
savings promotion contest does not constitute gambling or a
lottery.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. The Legislature finds and declares the
following:
(1) Federal law allows both depository financial
institutions and credit unions to hold savings promotion
contests, subject to certain conditions and authorization
under state law.
(2) Savings promotion contests in other states and
counties have led to an increase in the number and amount of
funds in personal savings accounts.
(3) Savings promotion contests encourage people to
save money by adding a feature to personal savings accounts
that includes a chance to win prizes.
(4) Savings promotion contests are not lotteries
because they do not require individuals to pay consideration
for a chance to win a prize, and the individual maintains
ownership of the money that is deposited into a savings
account or other qualifying account.
(5) The prizes are funded through the interest that
accrues across the pool of savings accounts participating in
the promotion contest.
(6) It is in the best interest of the citizens of
Alabama to encourage increases in personal savings accounts.
Section 2. When used in this act, the following
words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
(1) APPROPRIATE STATE OR FEDERAL REGULATORY AGENCY.
The state or federal agency that is statutorily responsible
for the supervision of all or part of the operations of a
participating financial institution.
(2) DEPOSITOR. An individual member or customer of a
financial institution who meets all of the following
requirements:
a. Maintains a qualifying account at a financial
institution participating in a savings promotion contest.
b. Is in good standing at a financial institution
authorized to do business in Alabama.
c. Is 18 years of age or older.
(3) ENTRY. A chance or chances obtained by a
depositor to win a designated prize or prizes in a savings
promotion contest by complying with the terms and conditions
of a savings promotion contest.
(4) FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. A bank, savings
institution, or credit union authorized to do business in
Alabama under federal or state law.
(5) PARTICIPATING FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. A financial
institution, as defined above, that is sponsoring a savings
promotion contest.
(6) QUALIFYING ACCOUNT. A savings account or other
savings product that is offered by a participating financial
institution and that meets all of the following requirements:
a. Allows deposits to be made by a depositor.
b. Is evidenced by periodic statements that are
delivered to the depositor or are available to the depositor
through electronic access.
c. Has an interest rate that is similar to, and not
less than, the interest rates of other comparable
nonqualifying accounts.
(7) SAVINGS PROMOTION ACCOUNT. A contest or
promotion sponsored by a financial institution or a group of
financial institutions in which a chance of winning designated
prizes is obtained by a depositor when the depositor either:
a. Deposits a specified amount of money or makes a
specified number of deposits into the depositor's qualifying
account.
b. Participates in one or more savings products or
programs.
Section 3. (a) Subject to supervision by the
appropriate federal or state regulatory agency, a financial
institution may conduct a savings promotion contest in
accordance with this act for the purposes of encouraging
depositors to maintain savings accounts and increase personal
savings. The financial institution may join with other
financial institutions to participate in a savings promotion
or contest.
(b) A savings promotion contest shall be subject to
all of the following conditions:
(1) Subject to any limits the financial institution
may place on the number of entries that may be placed by the
depositor, it is structured such that a depositor may place an
entry to win a prize or prizes by doing either of the
following:
a. Depositing a minimum specified amount of money or
making a specified number of deposits into a qualifying
account in accordance with the terms and conditions of the
specific savings promotion contest.
b. Participating in one or more savings products or
programs according to the terms and conditions of the savings
promotion contest.
(2) The participating financial institution complies
with all applicable consumer protection laws.
(3) No consideration is required as payment for a
chance at winning the prize or prizes. For purposes of this
subdivision, a depositor does not pay consideration if, as a
requirement of participating in the savings promotion contest,
the financial institution requires the depositor to deposit a
specified amount of money or make a specified number of
deposits into his or her account or participate in one or more
savings programs or products involving his or her accounts.
(4) Each entry has an equal chance of being chosen
as the winning entry.
(5) Participating depositors are not required to be
present at a drawing in order to win a prize.
(6) The participating financial institution
maintains books and records necessary to facilitate an audit
of the savings promotion contest and, upon written request,
provides those records to the appropriate federal or state
regulatory authority.
(7) The savings promotion contest is conducted in a
manner that protects the safety and soundness of the financial
institution and does not mislead depositors.
(8) The financial institution posts online the terms
and conditions of the savings promotion contest and lists each
location where entries may be submitted.
Section 4. Each savings promotion contest is subject
to oversight by the federal or state agency responsible for
regulating the financial institution, and the regulatory
agency may issue cease and desist orders relating to a savings
promotion contest offered by a financial institution which it
regulates if the regulatory agency concludes, based on
substantial evidence, that the financial institution is
engaging in unsafe or unsound practices or that the financial
institution has violated any law or rule, condition, or
agreement of the regulatory agency.
Section 5. A savings promotion contest offered
pursuant to this act does not constitute gambling or the
promotion of gambling or a lottery or raffle pursuant to
Section 65 of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901.
Section 6. All laws or parts of laws that conflict
with this act are repealed.
Section 7. This act shall become effective on
January 1, 2018.