SB141
180882-1
By Senator Singleton
RFD: Governmental Affairs
First Read: 09-FEB-17
180882-1:n:12/16/2016:PMG/th LRS2016-3537
SYNOPSIS:           This bill would prohibit discrimination
against a certain state employee or a prospective
state employee on the basis of his or her race,
color, religion, national origin, ethnicity, sex,
sexual orientation, gender identity or expression,
disability, or age.
This bill would also provide that a
violation of this act does not authorize a state
employee or prospective state employee to pursue a
private cause of action against the state or any
state employee.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
Relating to employment discrimination; to prohibit
discrimination against a certain state employee or a
prospective state employee on the basis of his or her race,
color, religion, national origin, ethnicity, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, disability, or
age; and to provide that a violation of this act does not
authorize a state employee or prospective state employee to
pursue a private cause of action against the state or any
state employee.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. The Legislature acknowledges that Alabama
is a diverse state with people of many different faiths,
races, ages, interests, and passions. The beliefs of the
state's citizens are strong and sincerely held, and the
Legislature celebrates those beliefs, in particular the very
deeply felt religious convictions of many of our people. The
state and its residents are also a kind people, with a deep
sense of fairness and justice. It is this sense of justice
that requires the acknowledgement that, while there are many
beliefs and practices that we may, as individuals, disagree
with, it is nevertheless improper to use those beliefs as
grounds for discriminating against others in public employment
when our differences are unrelated to employment or a person's
ability to perform job-related tasks and duties.
Section 2. (a) It is an unlawful employment practice
to discriminate in the hiring, promotion, discipline, or
termination of any state employee or prospective state
employee on the basis of his or her race, color, religion,
national origin, ethnicity, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity or expression, disability, or age.
(b) A state employee or prospective state employee
who has been discriminated against in violation of this
section shall have the right to file a complaint with the
State Personnel Department. The State Personnel Department may
adopt rules in accordance with the Administrative Procedure
Act to implement this section.
(c) Nothing in this section shall be construed to
authorize a state employee or a prospective state employee to
pursue a private cause of action or to subject the state or
any state employee to any civil damages, penalties, or other
liability due to a violation of this section.
Section 3. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.