SB234
183271-4
By Senator Holtzclaw
RFD: Fiscal Responsibility and Economic Development
First Read: 23-FEB-17
SB234
ENROLLED, An Act,
Relating to alcoholic beverages; to amend Sections
28-3A-6 and 28-4A-3, Code of Alababma 1975, to clarify that
manufacturers and brewpubs are not required to maintain name,
address, or other personal demographic information for certain
sales.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Sections 28-3A-6 and 28-4A-3, Code of
Alabama 1975, are amended to read as follows:
"ยง28-3A-6.
"(a) Upon applicant's compliance with the provisions
of this chapter and the regulations made thereunder, the board
shall issue to applicant a manufacturer license which shall
authorize the licensee to manufacture or otherwise distill,
produce, ferment, brew, bottle, rectify, or compound alcoholic
beverages within this state or for sale or distribution within
this state. No person shall manufacture or otherwise distill,
produce, ferment, brew, bottle, rectify or compound alcoholic
beverages within this state or for sale or distribution within
this state or to the state, the board, or any licensee of the
board, unless such person or the authorized representative of
the person shall be granted a manufacturer license issued by
the board.
"(b) No manufacturer licensee shall sell any
alcoholic beverages direct to any retailer or for consumption
on the premises where sold except as specified under
subsection (h), nor sell or deliver any such alcoholic
beverages in other than original containers approved as to
capacity by the board and in accordance with standards of fill
prescribed by the U. S. Treasury Department, nor maintain or
operate within the state any place or places, other than the
place or places covered by the manufacturer license, where
alcoholic beverages are sold or where orders are taken.
"(c) Each manufacturer licensee shall be required to
file with the board, prior to making any sales in Alabama a
list of its labels to be sold in Alabama and shall file with
the board its federal certificate of label approvals or its
certificates of exemption as required by the U. S. Treasury
Department. All liquors and wines whose labels have not been
registered as herein provided for shall be considered
contraband and may be seized by the board or its agents, or
any peace officer of the State of Alabama without a warrant
and the goods shall be delivered to the board and disposed of
as provided by law.
"(d) All such manufacturer licensees shall be
required to mail to the board prior to the twentieth day of
each month a consolidated report of all shipments of alcoholic
beverages made to each wholesaler during the preceding month.
Such reports shall be in such form and containing such
information as the board may prescribe.
"(e) Every manufacturer shall keep at its principal
place of business within the state, daily permanent records
which shall show the quantities of raw materials received and
used in the manufacture of alcoholic beverages, and the
quantities of alcoholic beverages manufactured and stored, the
sale of alcoholic beverages, the quantities of alcoholic
beverages stored for hire or transported for hire by or for
the licensee and the names and addresses of the purchasers or
other recipients thereof.
"(f) Every place licensed as a manufacturer shall be
subject to inspection by members of the board or by persons
duly authorized and designated by the board at any and all
times of the day or night as they may deem necessary, for the
detection of violations of this chapter, of any law, or of the
rules and regulations of the board, or for the purpose of
ascertaining the correctness of the records required to be
kept by the licensees. The books and records of such licensees
shall, at all times, be open to inspection by members of the
board, or by persons duly authorized and designated by the
board. Members of the board and its duly authorized agents
shall have the right, without hindrance, to enter any place
which is subject to inspection hereunder, or any place where
such records are kept for the purpose of making such
inspections and making transcripts thereof.
"(g) Licenses issued under this section shall,
unless revoked in the manner provided in this chapter, be
valid for the license year commencing January 1 of each year.
"(h)(1) A manufacturer licensee actively and
continuously engaged in the manufacture of alcoholic beverages
on the manufacturer's licensed premises in the state may
conduct tastings or samplings on the licensed premises, as
regulated by the ABC Board except as to quantity and hours of
operation, or as otherwise provided by statute, and for that
purpose give away or sell alcoholic beverages manufactured
there for consumption on only one premises where manufactured.
"All alcoholic beverages manufactured and retained
on the manufacturer's licensed premises for tasting or
sampling shall remain on the premises and be dispensed from a
barrel or keg or other original containers.
"(2) Notwithstanding subdivision (1), a manufacturer
licensee engaged in the manufacture of less than 60,000
barrels of beer per year may sell at retail on its licensed
premises in the state, for off-premises consumption, beer
produced at that licensed premises; provided, however, beer
sold for off-premises consumption: May not exceed 288 ounces
per customer per day; may not be produced pursuant to a
contract with another manufacturer; and shall be sealed,
labeled, packaged, and taxed in accordance with state and
federal laws and regulations. For purposes of this
subdivision, beer produced by a parent, subsidiary, or
affiliate of the licensee, or by a contract brewery,
regardless of where the beer is produced, shall be included
for purposes of calculating the 60,000 barrel limit.
"(3) A manufacturer licensee engaged in the
manufacture of liquor on the manufacturer's licensed premises
in the state may sell at retail on its licensed premises, for
off-premises consumption, liquor manufactured at that licensed
premises; provided, however, liquor sold for off-premises
consumption may not exceed 750 milliliters per customer per
day and shall be sealed, labeled, packaged, and taxed in
accordance with state and federal laws and regulations. The
manufacturer licensee shall keep and maintain records for
three years of all sales for off-premises consumption.
"(4) Notwithstanding subdivision (1), the board may
grant a permit allowing a manufacturer licensee engaged in the
manufacture of less than 50,000 gallons of table wine per year
in the state to establish and operate one additional off-site
tasting room to be used to conduct tastings or samplings and
to sell at retail the licensee's table wine. The board may
also grant a single permit allowing an association
representing the majority of wineries and grape growers in the
state to establish and operate one off-site tasting room to be
used to conduct tastings and samplings and to sell at retail
table wines produced by wine manufacturer licensees in the
state. An applicant for an off-site tasting room permit shall
file a written application with the board in such form and
containing such information as the board may prescribe, along
with proof of consent and approval from the appropriate
governing authority in which the off-site tasting room is to
be located and a filing fee of fifty dollars ($50). All state
and federal laws and regulations applicable to on-site tasting
rooms shall apply to an off-site tasting room. Wine sold at an
off-site tasting room for off-premises consumption may not
exceed one case of wine per customer per day. For purposes of
this subdivision, one case of wine means the equivalent of
twelve 750-milliliter bottles of wine.
"(i)(1) In addition to the licenses provided for by
Chapter 3A of this title, and any county or municipal license,
there is levied on the manufacturer of the alcoholic beverages
dispensed on the premises the privilege or excise tax imposed
on beer by Sections 28-3-184 and 28-3-190; and imposed on
table wine by Section 28-7-18; and imposed on liquor by
Sections 28-3-200 to 28-3-205, inclusive. Every manufacturer
licensee shall file the tax returns, pay the taxes, and
perform all obligations imposed on wholesalers at the times
and places set forth therein. It shall be unlawful for any
manufacturer licensee who is required to pay the taxes so
imposed in the first instance to fail or refuse to add to the
sale price and collect from the purchaser the required amount
of tax, it being the intent and purpose of this provision that
each of the taxes levied is in fact a tax on the consumer,
with the manufacturer licensee who pays the tax in the first
instance acting merely as an agent of the state for the
collection and payment of the tax levied by Section 28-3-184;
as an agent for the county or municipality for the collection
and payment of the tax levied by Section 28-3-190; as an agent
for the county or municipality for collection and payment of
the tax levied by Section 28-7-18; and as an agent for the
state for collection and payment of the tax levied by Sections
28-3-200 to 28-3-205, inclusive.
"(2) The manufacturer licensee shall keep and
maintain all records required to be kept and maintained by
manufacturer, wholesaler, and retailer licensees for the tax
so levied except that manufacturers are not required to
maintain name, address, or other personal demographic
information for sales as provided in 28-3A-6(h).
"(j) A manufacturer licensee engaged in the
manufacture of beer in the state may donate and deliver up to
two kegs of the manufacturer's beer to a licensed charitable
special event operated by or on behalf of a nonprofit
organization. Donations shall be taxed in accordance with
state and federal laws and regulations. Any beer remaining at
the conclusion of the charitable event shall be returned to
the manufacturer for disposal.
"(k) A manufacturer licensee engaged in the
manufacture of table wine in the state may donate and deliver
up to two cases of the manufacturer's table wine to a licensed
charitable special event operated by or on behalf of a
nonprofit organization. Donations shall be taxed in accordance
with state and federal laws and regulations. Any table wine
remaining at the conclusion of the charitable event shall be
returned to the manufacturer for disposal.
"ยง28-4A-3.
"(a) In addition to the licenses authorized to be
issued and renewed by the board pursuant to the Alcoholic
Beverage Licensing Code codified as Chapter 3A of this title,
the board, upon applicant's compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and with Chapter 3A and the regulations made
thereunder, is authorized to issue to a qualified applicant a
brewpub license which shall authorize the licensee to
manufacture or brew beer, in a quantity not to exceed 10,000
barrels in any one year and to sell beer brewed on the
licensed premises in unpackaged form at retail for on-premises
consumption at the licensed premises only; to sell beer brewed
on the licensed premises in packaged form at retail for
off-premises consumption, provided the beer sold for
off-premises consumption may not exceed 288 ounces per
customer per day and shall be sealed, labeled, packaged, and
taxed in accordance with state and federal laws and
regulations; to sell beer brewed on the premises in original,
unopened barrel or keg containers to any licensed wholesaler
designated by a brewpub licensee pursuant to Sections 28-8-2
and 28-9-3 for resale to retail licensees; to donate and
deliver up to two kegs of the licensee's beer to a licensed
charitable special event operated by or on behalf of a
nonprofit organization; provided, however, donations shall be
taxed in accordance with state and federal laws and
regulations, and any beer remaining at the conclusion of the
charitable event shall be returned to the manufacturer for
disposal; and to purchase beer, including draft or keg beer,
in original, unopened containers from licensed wholesalers and
to sell such beer at retail for on-premises consumption only,
in a room or rooms or place on the licensed premises at all
times accessible to the use and accommodation of the general
public, subject to the following conditions:
"(1) The proposed location of the premises shall
not, at the time of the original application, be prohibited by
a valid zoning ordinance or other ordinance in the valid
exercise of police power by the governing body of the
municipality or county in which the brewpub is located.
"(2) Beer brewed by the brewpub licensee shall be
packaged or contained in barrels from which the beer is to be
dispensed only on the premises where brewed for consumption on
the premises or sold in original, unopened barrel or keg
containers to any designated wholesaler licensee for resale to
retailer licensees.
"(3) The brewpub must contain and operate a
restaurant or otherwise provide food for consumption on the
premises.
"(4) The brewpub may not sell any alcoholic
beverages if it is not actively and continuously engaged in
the manufacture or brewing of alcoholic beverages on the
brewpub's licensed premises.
"(b) The annual license fee levied and prescribed
for a license as a brewpub issued or renewed by the board
pursuant to the authority of this chapter is $1,000.
"(c) Except as provided in this subsection, the
provisions of this title shall be applicable. The provisions
of Section 28-3-4 and subsection (b) of Section 28-3A-6, shall
not be applicable with regard to beer brewed by the brewpub
and sold and dispensed on the brewpub premises. In all other
respects, Section 28-3-4, and Section 28-3A-6(b), and
28-3A-6(i)(2) shall be applicable."
Section 2. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.
President and Presiding Officer of the Senate
Speaker of the House of Representatives
SB234
Senate 15-MAR-17
I hereby certify that the within Act originated in and passed
the Senate, as amended.
Patrick Harris,
Secretary.
House of Representatives
Passed: 19-MAY-17
By: Senator Holtzclaw