HB82
188360-1
By Representative Coleman
RFD: Boards, Agencies and Commissions
First Read: 09-JAN-18
PFD: 01/08/2018
188360-1:n:11/17/2017:PMG/tj LSA2017-3120
SYNOPSIS:            Under existing law, certified public
accountants and public accountants are licensed and
regulated by the Alabama State Board of Public
Accountancy.
This bill would alter the composition of the
board.
This bill would further define terms.
This bill would authorize the board to
classify a certified public accountant or public
accountant as retired.
This bill would also shorten the grace
period after a license has lapsed after which time
the board may take disciplinary action against a
licensee for failure to apply for a permit or be
placed on inactive status.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
Relating to public accountants; to amend Sections
34-1-2, 34-1-3, 34-1-11, and 34-1-12, Code of Alabama 1975; to
alter the composition of the Alabama State Board of Public
Accountancy; to further define terms; to authorize the board
to classify a licensed certified public accountant or public
accountant as retired; and to shorten the grace period after a
license has lapsed after which time the board may take
disciplinary action against a licensee for failure to apply
for a permit or be placed on inactive status.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Sections 34-1-2, 34-1-3, 34-1-11, and
34-1-12, Code of Alabama 1975, are amended to read as follows:
"ยง34-1-2.
"For purposes of this chapter, the following words
and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed in
this section:
"(1) AICPA. The American Institute of Certified
Public Accountants.
"(2) ATTEST. Providing the following services:
"a. Any audit or other engagement to be performed in
accordance with the Statements on Auditing Standards (SAS).
"b. Any review of a financial statement to be
performed in accordance with the Statements on Standards for
Accounting and Review Services (SSARS).
"c. Any engagement to be performed in accordance
with the Statements on Standards for Attestation Engagements
(SSAE).
"d. Any engagement to be performed in accordance
with the auditing standards of the Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board (PCAOB).
"e. The statements on standards specified in this
definition shall be adopted by reference by the board pursuant
to rule making and shall be those developed for general
application by recognized national accountancy organizations
such as the AICPA and PCAOB.
"(3) BOARD. The Alabama State Board of Public
Accountancy created by Section 34-1-3, except the special
meaning applicable only to Section 34-1-4.
"(4) COMPILATION. Providing a service of any
compilation engagement to be performed in accordance with
Statements on Standards for Accounting and Review Services
(SSARS). that is presenting in the form of financial
statements, information that is the representation of
management (owners) without undertaking to express any
assurance on the statements.
"(5) FIRM. A sole proprietorship, partnership,
professional corporation, professional association, limited
liability company, limited liability partnership, or any other
form of business entity now or hereafter recognized by Alabama
law.
"(6) LICENSE. A certificate issued pursuant to
Section 34-1-4, a permit issued pursuant to Section 34-1-11,
registration pursuant to Section 34-1-8; or, in each case, a
certificate or permit issued pursuant to corresponding
provisions of prior law, or the practice privilege provided
pursuant to Section 34-1-7.
"(7) LICENSEE. The holder of a license.
"(8) OWNER. Any person who holds an ownership
interest in a firm.
"(9) PEER REVIEW. The study, appraisal, or review of
one or more aspects of the professional work of a licensee or
firm that performs attest or compilation services, by a person
or persons who hold licenses and who are not affiliated with
the licensee or firm being reviewed.
"(10) PREPARATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENT. Providing
a service of any preparation of financial statements
engagement to be performed in accordance with Statements on
Standards for Accounting and Review Services (SSARS).
"(11)a. REPORT. When used in reference to any attest
or compilation service, an opinion, report, or other form of
language that states or implies assurance as to the
reliability of the attested information or compiled financial
statements and that also includes or is accompanied by any
statement or implication that the person or firm issuing it
has special knowledge or competence in accounting or auditing.
Such a statement or implication of special knowledge or
competence may arise from use by the insurer or the report of
names or titles indicating that the person or firm is an
accountant or auditor or from the language of the report
itself.
"b. The term report includes any form of language
that disclaims an opinion when such form of language is
conventionally understood to imply any positive assurance as
to the reliability of the attested information or compiled
financial statements referred to or special competence on the
part of the person or firm issuing such language. The term
report includes any other form of language that is
conventionally understood to imply such assurance or such
special knowledge or competence.
"(11) (12) STATE. Any state, territory, or insular
possession of the United States or the District of Columbia.
"ยง34-1-3.
"(a) There is created a board of public accountancy
in and for the State of Alabama, to be known as the Alabama
State Board of Public Accountancy. The board shall consist of
seven members appointed by the Governor and, effective October
1, 1988, confirmed by the Senate. Members of the board shall
be citizens of the United States and residents of the state.
The membership of the board shall be inclusive and reflect the
racial, gender, geographic, urban/rural, and economic
diversity of the state. Five Commencing October 1, 2019, six
members of the Alabama State Board of Public Accountancy shall
be certified public accountants in good standing with the
board and shall be appointed by the Governor to the board. The
Governor shall, in addition, appoint two other members to the
board one being a public accountant who holds an active
license to practice public accountancy issued under the laws
of this state and who is in active practice as a public
accountant and a seventh and one member of the board who shall
be a public member who is not under the jurisdiction of the
board, but shall at the time of his or her appointment be an
active and reputable member of the Alabama business community
who possesses a knowledge and understanding of financial
transactions and financial statements. The persons and their
successors shall constitute the Board of Public Accountancy
and shall have and exercise all the powers and authority
vested by law in the board.
"(b) All appointments shall be effective on October
1 for four-year terms, unless an appointment is made for an
unexpired term.
"(c) The Alabama Society of Certified Public
Accountants shall, at least 30 days prior to the beginning of
any term or within 30 days after any position on the board
becomes vacant, submit to the Governor the names of five
persons qualified for membership on the board for the
certified public accountant position and public member
position to be filled, and the Governor shall appoint one of
the five nominees. Upon the failure of the Alabama Society of
Certified Public Accountants to submit timely nominations for
a position on the Board of Public Accountancy, the Board of
Public Accountancy may submit nominations for the position to
the Governor, who shall appoint one of the five nominees.
"(d) The Alabama Association of Accountants shall,
at least 30 days prior to the beginning of any term or within
30 days after any position on the board becomes vacant, submit
the names of five persons qualified for membership on the
board for the public accountant position to be filled, and the
Governor shall appoint one of the five nominees. Upon the
failure of the Alabama Association of Accountants to submit
timely nominations for a position on the Board of Public
Accountancy, the Board of Public Accountancy may submit
nominations for the position to the Governor, who shall
appoint one of the five nominees.
"(e) (d) No person who has served two successive
complete terms on the board shall be eligible for
reappointment until after the lapse of one year. An
appointment to fill an unexpired term shall not be considered
a complete term. Vacancies occurring during a term shall be
filled by appointment for the unexpired term. Upon the
expiration of his or her term of office, a member shall
continue to serve until his or her successor is appointed and
confirmed by the Senate. Within 15 days after their
confirmation by the Senate, the members of the board shall
take an oath before any person lawfully authorized to
administer oaths in this state to faithfully and impartially
perform their duties as members of the board, and the same
shall be filed with the Secretary of State. The Governor shall
remove from the board any accountant-member whose permit to
practice has become void, has been revoked, or suspended, or
may, after a hearing, remove any member of the board for
neglect of duty or just cause.
"(f) (e) The board shall elect annually a chair, a
vice-chair, and a secretary from its members.
"(g) (f) The board may adopt and amend rules and
regulations pursuant to the Administrative Procedure Act for
the orderly conduct of its affairs and for the administration
of this chapter.
"(h) (g) A majority of the board shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business.
"(i) (h) The board shall have a seal which shall be
judicially noticed.
"(j) (i) The board shall keep records of its
proceedings and of any proceeding in court, civil or criminal,
arising out of or founded upon this chapter. Copies of the
records certified as correct under the seal of the board shall
be admissible in evidence to prove the content of the records.
"(k) (j) The board shall maintain an annual register
which shall contain the names, arranged alphabetically by
classification, of all licensees under this chapter; the names
of the members of the board; and all other information deemed
proper by the board. The board may charge a fee in an amount
set by it for furnishing the annual register to persons who
request it.
"(l) (k) The board shall employ an executive
director who is a certified public accountant in good standing
with the board and such other personnel as may be needed,
including, but not limited to, certified public accountants in
good standing with the board, and shall arrange for such
assistance, services, supplies, and equipment as it requires
for the performance of its duties. The number of employees,
their compensation, and all other expenses of the board shall
be paid at such rates and in such amounts as the board shall
approve. The executive director and other employees of the
board shall not be subject to or governed by the provisions of
the state Merit System law but shall be entitled to all
benefits accruing to Merit System employees including, but not
limited to, the right to accumulate leave, participate in the
Employees' Retirement System, and participate in the State
Employees' Health Insurance Plan.
"(m) (l) The board may promulgate and amend rules of
professional conduct appropriate to establish and maintain a
high standard of integrity in the profession of public
accountancy. At least 60 days prior to the promulgation of any
rule or amendment, the board shall mail copies of the proposed
rule or amendment to each holder of a permit issued under
Section 34-1-11, with a notice advising him or her of the
proposed effective date of the rule or amendment and
requesting that he or she submit comments thereon at least 15
days prior to the effective date; the comments shall be
advisory only. Failure to receive by mail the rule, amendment,
or notice by all permit holders shall not affect the validity
of any rule or amendment.
"(n) (m) Each member of the board shall be paid the
same per diem and travel allowance paid to state employees for
each day the member is actively engaged in the official
business of the board out of the funds of the board.
"(o) (n) Any records, information, or writings
obtained or kept by the Board of Public Accountancy in
connection with a peer review program which the board is
authorized to establish by rules and regulations, or obtained
or kept by the board in connection with a disciplinary
investigation shall be held in confidence. If, pursuant to a
disciplinary investigation, probable cause for a hearing is
found by the board, records, information, or writings upon
which the finding is based shall be available to the licensee
under investigation. Records, information, and writings held
in confidence shall not be disclosed to any person except to
the extent necessary to carry out the purposes of the peer
review program, the investigation, or the provisions of this
chapter; pursuant to a court order for the production of
evidence or the discovery thereof; or pursuant to litigation
involving the Board of Public Accountancy wherein the records,
information, or writings are relevant to the issue in
litigation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, with respect to
peer review programs deemed acceptable to the board which are
performed by other organizations, the board shall require that
the peer review processes be operated and documents maintained
in a manner designed to preserve confidentiality, and that
neither the board nor any third party, other than an oversight
body, shall have access to documents furnished or generated in
the course of the review.
"ยง34-1-11.
"(a)(1) Permits to engage in the practice of public
accounting in this state shall be issued by the board to a
holder of a certificate of certified public accountant issued
under Section 34-1-4 and to a person registered under Section
34-1-8 who furnishes evidence satisfactory to the board of
compliance with the requirements of subsection (c) and who:
(1) is a citizen of the United States or, if not a citizen of
the United States, a person who is legally present in the
United States with appropriate documentation from the federal
government, or has declared his or her intent to become a
citizen; and (2) has attained the age of 19 years; and (3) is
of good moral character; and (4) meets the experience
requirements set forth in subsection (e). Permits to engage in
the practice of public accounting in this state also shall be
issued by the board to persons or firms under Sections 34-1-5,
34-1-6, and 34-1-9, if all offices of those certificate
holders or registrants are maintained and registered as
required under Section 34-1-10. There shall be an annual
permit fee for each certificate holder under Section 34-1-4,
each registrant under Section 34-1-8, and each firm in an
amount to be determined by the board. All permits shall expire
on September 30 of each year and may be renewed annually for a
period of one year. The application for renewal and annual
renewal fee shall be filed with this board no later than
December 31 following the expiration date. The board may also
charge a late renewal penalty on or after January 1 following
the expiration date in an amount set by the board which is
graduated depending on the length of time the renewal is
delinquent.
"(2) The board shall by rule require as a condition
for renewal of a permit under this section, by any permit
holder who performs compilation services for the public other
than through a CPA or PA firm, that such individual undergo,
no more frequently than once every three years, a peer review
conducted in such manner as the board shall by rule specify.
"(b)(1) Notwithstanding subsection (a), a certified
public accountant or public accountant registered under this
chapter who is not engaged in the practice of public
accounting may request the board, in writing, to place his or
her name on the board's inactive roll or retired roll, thereby
granting him or her inactive status or retired status, and
protecting his or her right to obtain a permit to practice
pursuant to subsection (a) at a later time as he or she wishes
to become actively engaged in the practice of public
accounting.
"(2) If, upon receipt of the notification, the board
determines that the certified public accountant or public
accountant is not engaged in public accounting, the certified
public accountant or public accountant shall be permitted to
retain his or her initial registration or certificate by
paying an annual registration fee in an amount as the board
shall, from time to time, determine. Effective October 1,
2007, certified Certified public accountants or public
accountants granted inactive status or retired status by the
board shall place the word "inactive" or "retired,"
respectively, adjacent to their CPA title or PA title on any
business card, letterhead, or any other document or device,
with the exception of their CPA certificate or PA
registration, on which their CPA or PA title appears. If a
certified public accountant or public accountant who has
elected inactive status or retired status wishes to reenter
the active practice of public accountancy, he or she shall
make application to the board for an annual permit to
practice. The board, in its rules and regulations, shall
specify the number of hours of continuing education the
applicant shall obtain before he or she regains active status
to ensure his or her competency to practice public accounting.
"(c) Every application for renewal of an annual
permit to practice by any person who holds a certificate as a
certified public accountant or who is a registrant under
Section 34-1-8 shall be accompanied or supported by any
evidence the board prescribes of satisfaction of its
continuing education requirements during the preceding year.
Failure by an applicant for renewal of an annual permit to
furnish the evidence shall constitute grounds for revocation,
suspension, or refusal to renew the permit in a proceeding
under Section 34-1-12, unless the board determines the failure
to have been due to reasonable cause. The board may renew an
annual permit to practice despite failure to furnish evidence
of satisfaction of requirements of continuing education upon
the condition that the applicant follows a particular program
or schedule of continuing education. In issuing rules,
regulations, and individual orders in respect of requirements
of continuing education, the board may, among other things,
use and rely upon guidelines and pronouncements of recognized
educational and professional associations; may prescribe for
content, duration, and organization of courses; shall take
into account the accessibility by applicants to the continuing
education required and any impediments to interstate practice
of public accountancy which result from the difference in the
requirements in other states; and may provide for relaxation
or suspension of those requirements in regard to applicants
who certify that they do not intend to engage in the practice
of public accountancy, and for instances of individual
hardships.
"(d) In the event a certified public accountant or
public accountant fails to apply for an annual permit to
practice or to be placed on the board's inactive roll within:
(1) One year Six months from the expiration date of the permit
to practice last obtained or renewed pursuant to subsection
(a); (2) one year six months from the expiration date of the
last annual renewal of his or her certificate pursuant to
subsection (b); or (3) one year six months from the date upon
which the certificate holder or registrant was granted his or
her certificate or registration, if no permit was ever issued
to him or her under subsection (a) or his or her name was
never placed on the board's inactive roll under subsection
(b), it shall deprive him or her of the right to apply for a
permit or inactive status, and shall constitute grounds for
revocation or suspension of the holder's certificate, unless
the board determines the failure to have been due to
reasonable cause. In that case, the board may impose a
reinstatement fee not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100),
plus the total annual registration fees and late renewal
penalties which the certified public accountant or public
accountant would have paid under this chapter during the
period when neither a permit nor inactive   status was
maintained. The board may also charge an inactive status
penalty in an amount set by the board which is graduated for
the time of the inactivity.
"(e) The experience requirement shall be one year of
experience in the practice of public accounting as defined by
the board's rules and regulations.
"ยง34-1-12.
"(a) After notice and hearing as provided in Section
34-1-14, the board may suspend for a period not to exceed
three years or revoke any certificate issued under Section
34-1-4, or any registration granted under Section 34-1-5 or
34-1-8, or any practice privilege granted pursuant to Section
34-1-7; may revoke, suspend, or refuse to renew any permit
issued under Section 34-1-11; or may censure the holder of any
permit or any practice privilege for any one or any
combination of the following causes:
"(1) Fraud or deceit in obtaining a certificate as a
certified public accountant or in obtaining registration under
this chapter or in obtaining a permit to practice public
accounting under this chapter.
"(2) Dishonesty, fraud, or gross negligence in the
practice of public accounting.
"(3) Any violation of Section 34-1-16.
"(4) Any violation of a rule of professional conduct
promulgated by the board under the authority granted by this
chapter.
"(5) Conviction of any crime, an element of which is
dishonesty or fraud, under the laws of any state or of the
United States.
"(6) Conviction of a felony under the laws of any
state or of the United States.
"(7) Cancellation, revocation, suspension, or
refusal to renew authority to practice as a certified public
accountant or a public accountant by any other state for any
cause other than failure to pay an annual registration fee in
the other state.
"(8) Suspension or revocation of the right to
practice before any state or federal agency.
"(9) Failure to be legally present in this state, or
to become a citizen of the United States within six years by
any person not a citizen of the United States when he or she
received a certificate as a certified public accountant or was
registered as a public accountant under this chapter.
"(10) Failure to apply for an annual permit to
practice or to be placed on the board's inactive roll within
any of the following time periods:
"a. One year Six months from the expiration date of
the permit to practice last obtained or renewed pursuant to
Section 34-1-11(a).
"b. One year Six months from the expiration date of
the last annual renewal of his or her certificate pursuant to
Section 34-1-11(b).
"c. One year Six months from the date upon which the
certificate holder or registrant was granted his or her
certificate or registration, if no permit was ever issued
under Section 34-1-11(a) or his or her name was never placed
on the board's inactive roll under Section 34-1-11(b), unless
the failure is excused by the board pursuant to Section
34-1-11.
"(11) Conduct discreditable to the public accounting
profession.
"(12) Failure of a certificate holder or registrant
to furnish evidence of satisfaction of requirements of
continuing education as required by the board pursuant to
Section 34-1-11 or to meet any conditions in respect of
continuing education which the board may have ordered with
respect to the certificate holder under that section.
"(13) Failure to comply with the provisions and
requirements of the board's peer review program.
"(14) Failure to comply with this chapter or rules
promulgated by the board under this chapter or failure to
comply with professional standards.
"(15) Making any false or misleading statement or
verification in support of an application for a certificate,
registration, or permit filed by another.
"(b) In addition to the disciplinary powers granted
pursuant to subsection (a), the board may singly, or in
combination with any other disciplinary action, levy and
collect administrative fines for violations of this chapter or
the rules and regulations of the board of not more than five
thousand dollars ($5,000) for each violation."
Section 2. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.