SB236
193048-3
By Senator Singleton
RFD: Education and Youth Affairs
First Read: 25-JAN-18
SB236
ENGROSSED
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
To amend Sections 16-50-20, 16-50-23, and 16-50-27,
Code of Alabama 1975, relating to Alabama State University, to
remove the prohibition against persons aged 70 and older
serving on the board of trustees; to provide further for the
authority and responsibilities of the board of trustees and
the president of the university; and to   increase the number
of trustees necessary to constitute a quorum from six to
eight.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Sections 16-50-20, 16-50-23, and 16-50-27
of the Code of Alabama 1975, are amended to read as follows:
"ยง16-50-20.
"(a) There is hereby created a Board of Trustees for
Alabama State University, the state educational institution at
Montgomery, Alabama. The board of trustees shall consist of
two members from the congressional district in which the
institution is located and one member from each of the other
congressional districts in the state as constituted on October
6, 1975, and who shall reside in that district, four members
from the state at large who shall reside in different
districts, two of whom shall be non-minority members, two
at-large members who may be selected from outside the state,
and the Governor, who shall be ex officio president of the
board. Except for a trustee at large, the position of any
trustee shall be vacated at such time as he or she shall cease
to reside in the district from which he or she was appointed.
The position of state at-large trustee shall be vacated if the
trustee serving in the position shall cease to reside in the
State of Alabama. The trustees shall be appointed by the
Governor, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, in
such manner that the membership shall consist of at least a
majority who are alumni and who have received a bachelor's
degree from the university; at least one-half of the board
shall be from the prevailing minority population of the state
according to the last or any succeeding federal census. The
two at large members who may be selected from outside the
state shall be appointed in 2015 for initial terms of five
years and six years, respectively, and for terms of six years
thereafter. Commencing on June 11, 2015, members shall be
appointed for terms of six years. All appointments shall be
effective until adversely acted upon by the Senate. Provided,
however, no trustee who is currently serving on the board or
whose term has just expired, who has been previously confirmed
by the Senate, shall be required to be reconfirmed for the new
term under this section, once appointed by the Governor.
Commencing on June 11, 2015, no member may be appointed to
serve a second term of 12 years, and no member shall be
appointed to serve as trustee for more than a total of 12
years or two six-year terms. No trustee shall receive any pay
or emolument other than his or her actual expenses incurred in
the discharge of his or her duties as such. No member shall
serve past September 30 following his or her seventieth
birthday.
"(b) No trustee who is serving on the board on April
30, 1986, shall lose his or her seat because of this section;
provided, however, the Governor may re-designate the period of
the term of these members so as to conform to subsection (a).
"(c)(1) Commencing on June 11, 2015, each trustee
shall be appointed by the Governor from a list of three
persons nominated by a nominating committee. The nominating
committee shall consist of the following members:
"a. One member of the board as elected by the
membership of the board.
"b. One member of the faculty senate as selected
jointly by the faculty senate and the staff senate and
certified to the committee by the president of the faculty
senate and the president of the staff senate.
"c. The president of the student government
association.
"d. One member of the business community as selected
by the Governor.
"e. One member of the Montgomery County Legislative
Delegation, as selected by the delegation.
"f. The president of the national alumni
association, or his or her designee.
"g. A community representative as selected by the
membership of the nominating committee.
"(2) Where applicable, members of the nominating
committee shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing
authority for a period of at least one year.
"(3) Thirty days before the expiration of the term
of a board member, or within 20 days following the creation of
a vacancy in a term of office by death, resignation, or other
cause, the president pro tempore of the board shall call a
meeting of the nominating committee, giving at least 10 days'
notice. The nominating committee, by majority vote of those
present at the meeting, shall nominate to the Governor the
names of three individuals who are qualified pursuant to
subsection (a) to fill the respective position on the board.
The Governor shall appoint one of the nominated persons to the
board by and with the advice and consent of the Senate. If the
appointment is made by the Governor while the Legislature is
not in session, the name of the appointee of the Governor
shall be submitted to the Senate not later than the third
legislative day following the reconvening of the Legislature.
If the appointment is made by the Governor while the
Legislature is in session, the name of the appointee shall be
submitted to the Senate not later than the next legislative
day following the date of the appointment.
"(4)a. If the vacancy on the board is caused by the
expiration of the term of a trustee who has served for less
than the maximum 12 years of service on the board, the
vacating trustee shall continue to serve on the board until
his or her successor is confirmed by the Senate. If the
holdover trustee is reappointed to the board, the term of
office for which he or she is reappointed shall be effective
retroactive to the date of the expiration of the previous
term. If a new trustee is appointed pursuant to this
paragraph, the term of office for which he or she is appointed
shall be effective retroactive to the date of the expiration
of the previous term.
"b. If the vacancy on the board is caused by death,
resignation, or the expiration of the term of a trustee who
has served for the maximum 12 years of service on the board,
the position on the board shall remain vacant until the name
of an appointee is submitted by the Governor to the Senate. If
the appointee is neither confirmed nor rejected by the Senate
during the session in which his or her name is submitted, the
appointee shall nevertheless continue to serve in the position
on the board until the next session of the Legislature, during
which his or her name shall be resubmitted for confirmation.
If an appointee is confirmed by the Senate, the term of office
for which he or she is appointed pursuant to this paragraph
shall be effective retroactive to the date the vacancy was
created on the board, for the remainder of the unexpired term
if the vacancy was created by death or resignation, or for the
entire term if the vacancy was created by the expiration of
the previous term. If an appointee is rejected by the Senate,
the position on the board shall remain vacant as the
nominating and appointing procedure provided in this
subsection begins anew and until an appointment is made and
confirmed by the Senate. If a trustee is appointed to fill an
unexpired term of less than three years, the time shall not be
counted toward the maximum 12 years of service.
"(5) If the nominating committee fails to submit a
list of nominees to the Governor within 30 60 days after a
vacancy occurs due to expiration of term, death, resignation,
or any other cause, the Governor, by and with the advice and
consent of the Senate, may appoint an otherwise qualified
trustee to the board, notwithstanding the absence of such
nominations.
"(d) The board shall provide for the conduct of
annual training sessions for trustees regarding the fiduciary
responsibility of a trustee to the university and any other
topic deemed appropriate by the board.
"ยง16-50-23.
"The board of trustees shall have the power to
organize the university by appointing a president or removing
a president for cause, whose salary shall be fixed by the
board and who shall serve as chief executive officer of the
university; and, upon his recommendation, the board shall
appoint a corps of instructors, who shall be styled the
faculty of the university, and such other officers and
professional and operating personnel as the interest of the
university may require; and to remove such instructors or
other personnel and to fix their salaries or compensation and
increase or reduce the same at its discretion; to regulate,
alter or modify the government of the university as it may
deem advisable; to prescribe courses of instruction, rates of
tuition and fees; to confer such academic and honorary degrees
as are usually conferred by institutions of similar character;
and to do whatever else it may deem best for promoting the
interest of the university.
"(a) The board of trustees shall appoint a president
who shall serve as the chief executive officer of the
university and as secretary to the board and shall perform all
services as may be required by the board. The compensation of
the president, including the emoluments and prerequisites
necessary to carry out the functions of the office, shall be
fixed by the board.
"(b) The board of trustees may act as a body, or may
delegate by resolution or bylaw to a committee of the board or
to the president, the authority to do any of the following:
"(1) Institute, regulate, alter, or modify the
organization of the university, subject to the review and
approval of the board.
"(2) Appoint a corps of instructors who shall be
styled the faculty of the university.
"(3). Appoint other instructors, officers, and
professionals as the interest of the university may require.
"(4) Hire personnel, establish and implement
personnel rules, and establish policies and practices for
hiring, promoting, demoting, and terminating instructors,
other personnel, and employees, or for taking any other action
consistent with this section.
"(5) Fix, increase, or decrease the salaries or
compensation of individual instructors and other personnel.
"(6) Remove any instructors or other personnel.
"(7) Prescribe courses of instruction, rates of
tuition, and fees, subject to the review and approval of the
board.
"(8) Confer academic and honorary degrees as are
usually conferred by institutions of similar character.
"ยง16-50-27.
"Six Eight members, exclusive of the Governor, of
the board of trustees shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller
number may adjourn from day to day until a quorum is present."
Section 2. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.
Senate
Read for the first time and referred to the Senate
committee on Education and Youth Affairs .........   2.5-JAN-18
Read for the second time and placed on the calen-
dar with 1 substitute and.........................   1.5-MAR-18
Read for the third time and passed as amended ....   2.1-MAR-18
Yeas 25
Nays 0
Patrick Harris,
Secretary.