SB256
190654-1
By Senator Ward
RFD: Finance and Taxation Education
First Read: 30-JAN-18
190654-1:n:01/29/2018:FC/bm LSA2018-546
SYNOPSIS:           This bill would provide an income tax credit
for qualified clean-burning motor fuel property,
including motor vehicles propelled by compressed
natural gas, liquefied natural gas, or liquefied
petroleum gas, for tax years beginning on January
1, 2019.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
To provide a credit against the state income tax for
the installation of certain qualified clean-burning motor fuel
property.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. (a) For the purposes of this act, the
following words have the following meanings:
(1) MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle as defined in
Section 32-1-1.1 of the Code of Alabama 1975, licensed to
operate lawfully and principally on streets and highways of
this state.
(2) QUALIFIED CLEAN-BURNING MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL
PROPERTY. Any of the following:
a. Equipment installed to modify a motor vehicle
which is propelled by gasoline or diesel fuel so that the
vehicle may be propelled by compressed natural gas, liquefied
natural gas, or liquefied petroleum gas. The equipment covered
by this paragraph shall be new and may not have been
previously used to modify or retrofit any vehicle propelled by
gasoline or diesel fuel.
b. A motor vehicle originally equipped so that the
vehicle may be propelled by compressed natural gas, liquefied
natural gas, or liquefied petroleum gas, but only to the
extent of the portion of the cost of the motor vehicle which
is attributable to the storage of the fuel, the delivery to
the engine of the motor vehicle of the fuel, and the exhaust
of gases from combustion of the fuel.
c. Property, not including a building and its
structural components, which is either of the following:
1. Directly related to the delivery of compressed
natural gas, liquefied natural gas, or liquefied petroleum gas
for commercial purposes or for a fee or charge into the fuel
tank of a motor vehicle propelled by the fuel including
compression equipment and storage tanks for the fuel at the
point where the fuel is delivered, but only if the property is
not used to deliver the fuel into any other type of storage
tank or receptacle and the fuel is not used for any purpose
other than to propel a motor vehicle.
2. A metered-for-fee public access recharging system
for motor vehicles propelled in whole or in part by
electricity. The property covered by this subparagraph shall
be new, and may not have been previously installed or used to
refuel vehicles powered by compressed natural gas, liquefied
natural gas, or liquefied petroleum gas or electricity.
d. Property which is directly related to the
compression and delivery of natural gas from a private home or
residence, for noncommercial purposes, into the fuel tank of a
motor vehicle propelled by compressed natural gas. The
property covered by this subparagraph shall be new and may not
have been previously installed or used to refuel vehicles
powered by natural gas.
Section 2. (a) For tax years beginning on or after
January 1, 2019, there shall be allowed a one-time credit
against the income tax imposed by Chapter 18, of Title 40,
Code of Alabama 1975, as follows:
(1) For qualified clean-burning motor vehicle fuel
property defined in paragraphs a., b., or c. of subdivision
(1) of Section 1, 50 percent of the cost of the qualified
clean-burning motor vehicle fuel property.
(2) For qualified clean-burning motor vehicle fuel
property defined in paragraph d. of subdivision (1) of Section
1, a credit of the lesser of 50 percent of the cost of the
qualified clean-burning motor vehicle fuel property or two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500).
(b) In cases in which no credit has been claimed
pursuant to subsection (a) by any prior owner and the motor
vehicle is purchased by a taxpayer with qualified
clean-burning motor vehicle fuel property installed by another
person or the manufacturer of the motor vehicle, and the
taxpayer is unable or elects not to determine the exact cost
which is attributable to the property, the taxpayer may claim
a credit in an amount not exceeding the lesser of 10 percent
of the cost of the motor vehicle or one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500).
(c) If the tax credit allowed in a taxable year
pursuant to this section exceeds the amount of income taxes
due or if there are no state income taxes due on the income of
the taxpayer, the amount of the credit not used as an offset
against the income taxes for a taxable year may be carried
forward as a credit against subsequent income tax liability
for a period not to exceed five years.
(d) A husband and wife who file separate returns for
a taxable year in which they could have filed a joint return
may each claim only one half of the tax credit that would have
been allowed for a joint return.
Section 3. The Department of Revenue may adopt rules
to carry out the purpose of this act, including rules to
establish and enforce civil penalties for violations thereof.
Section 4. This act shall become effective
immediately following its passage and approval by the
Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.