SB15
192540-3
By Senator Glover (Constitutional Amendment)
RFD: Constitution, Ethics and Elections
First Read: 09-JAN-18
PFD: 09/25/2017
SB15
ENROLLED, An Act,
Proposing an amendment to the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901; to provide that, if a vacancy in either the
House of Representatives or the Senate occurs on or after
October 1 of the third year of a quadrennium, the seat would
remain vacant until a successor is elected at the next
succeeding general election.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. The following amendment to the
Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as amended, is proposed and
shall become valid as a part thereof when approved by a
majority of the qualified electors voting thereon and in
accordance with Sections 284, 285, and 287 of the Constitution
of Alabama of 1901, as amended:
PROPOSED AMENDMENT
Part 1. Section 46 of the Constitution of Alabama of
1901, and Amendment 97 to the Constitution of Alabama of 1901,
both now appearing as Section 46 of the Official Recompilation
of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, are repealed.
Part 2. Section 46 is added to the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, to read as follows:
Section 46.
(a) Senators and representatives shall be elected by
the qualified electors on the first Tuesday after the first
Monday in November unless the Legislature shall change the
time of holding elections and in every fourth year thereafter.
The terms of office of the senators and representatives shall
commence on the day after the general election at which they
are elected, and expire on the day after the general election
held in the fourth year after their election, except as
otherwise provided in this Constitution. At the general
election in the year nineteen hundred and two all the
representatives, together with the senators for the even
numbered districts and for the thirty-fifth district, shall be
elected. The terms of those senators who represent the odd
numbered districts under the law in force prior to the
ratification of this Constitution, are hereby extended until
the day after the general election in the year nineteen
hundred and six; and until the expiration of his or her term
as hereinbefore extended, each such senator shall represent
the district established by this Constitution, bearing the
number corresponding with that for which he or she was
elected. In the year nineteen hundred and six, and in every
fourth year thereafter, all the senators and representatives
shall be elected.
(b) Except as provided in subsection (c), when a
vacancy occurs in either house of the Legislature, the
Governor shall issue a writ of election to fill the vacancy
for the remainder of the term. However, if the Secretary of
State determines that a legally qualified candidate for
election to the vacancy is unopposed when the last date for
filing certificates of nomination has passed, the election
shall not be held. The Secretary of State shall issue a
certificate of election to the candidate, the same as if an
election had been held, and the certificate shall be accepted
by the house in which the vacancy occurred as evidence of the
unopposed candidate's right to fill the position created by
the vacancy. In the event an election is held, all the costs
and expenses incurred thereby shall be paid out of any funds
in the State Treasury not otherwise appropriated.
(c) When a vacancy occurs in either house of the
Legislature on or after October 1 of the third year of a
quadrennium, the seat shall remain vacant until a successor is
elected at the next succeeding general election.
Section 2. An election upon the proposed amendment
shall be held in accordance with Sections 284 and 285 of the
Constitution of Alabama of 1901, now appearing as Sections 284
and 285 of the Official Recompilation of the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, as amended, and the election laws of this
state.
Section 3. The appropriate election official shall
assign a ballot number for the proposed constitutional
amendment on the election ballot and shall set forth the
following description of the substance or subject matter of
the proposed constitutional amendment:
"Proposing an amendment to the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, to provide that, if a vacancy in either the
House of Representatives or the Senate occurs on or after
October 1 of the third year of a quadrennium, the seat would
remain vacant until a successor is elected at the next
succeeding general election.
"Proposed by Act ________."
This description shall be followed by the following
language:
"Yes ( )   No ( )."
President and Presiding Officer of the Senate
Speaker of the House of Representatives
SB15
Senate 01-MAR-18
I hereby certify that the within Act originated in and passed
the Senate, as amended.
Patrick Harris,
Secretary.
House of Representatives
Passed: 20-MAR-18
By: Senator Glover