SB21
192299-3
By Senators Dial, Holley, Smitherman, Reed, Waggoner, Ward,
Scofield, Whatley, McClendon, Williams, Livingston, Chambliss,
Marsh, Stutts, Bussman, Beasley, Allen, Albritton and
Brewbaker
RFD: Finance and Taxation Education
First Read: 09-JAN-18
PFD: 11/07/2017
SB21
ENGROSSED
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
Relating to retirement; to provide for a funded
one-time lump-sum addition to the retirement benefits of
certain retirees and beneficiaries of the Teachers' Retirement
System.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. (a) There is hereby provided for fiscal
year 2017-2018 a funded one-time lump-sum payment, hereinafter
referred to as "lump-sum payment," to each person whose
effective date of retirement for purposes of receiving
benefits from the Teachers' Retirement System is prior to May
1, 2018, and who is receiving or is entitled to receive a
monthly allowance from the Teachers' Retirement System on
April 30, 2018.
(b) The formula for calculating the lump-sum payment
shall be one dollar ($1) per month for each year of service
attained by the retiree.
(c) Beneficiaries of deceased members or deceased
retirees, if the date of death for the deceased member, or the
effective date of retirement for the deceased retiree for
purposes of receiving benefits from the Teachers' Retirement
System was prior to May 1, 2018, and if the beneficiary is
receiving or is entitled to receive a monthly allowance from
the Teachers' Retirement System on April 30, 2018, shall
receive a lump-sum payment.
(d) There is hereby provided for fiscal year
2017-2018 a funded one-time lump-sum payment to certain
persons identified in subsection (e) herein, whose effective
date of retirement for purposes of receiving benefits from the
Teachers' Retirement System is prior to May 1, 2018, and who
is receiving or is entitled to receive a monthly allowance
from the Teachers' Retirement System on April 30, 2018.
(e) For purposes of this section, service includes
the service under Section 16-25-1 and Section 16-25-150 et
seq., Code of Alabama 1975.
(f) Any person who received benefits under the
Medicaid program and whose eligibility for Medicaid benefits
would be impaired by the lump-sum payment provided by this
section shall not be entitled to receive the aforementioned
increase. Any person who subsequently applies for benefits
under the Medicaid program and that person's eligibility to
receive benefits is impaired by the lump-sum payment provided
by this section shall not be entitled to receive the increase
subsequent to the date that the member files application for
benefits under the Medicaid program.
(g) The lump-sum payments provided under this
section shall be paid to all eligible recipients by the
Teachers' Retirement System in June 2018.
Section 2. It is not the intent of this act to make
appropriations, but the amount required to pay the cost of the
lump-sum payments provided under this act shall be made in the
annual Education Trust Fund budget act for the 2019 fiscal
year.
Section 3. This act shall become effective
immediately following its passage and approval by the
Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.
Senate
Read for the first time and referred to the Senate
committee on Finance and Taxation Education ......   0.9-JAN-18
Read for the second time and placed on the calen-
dar...............................................   0.8-FEB-18
Read for the third time and passed as amended ....   2.7-FEB-18
Yeas 27
Nays 1
Abstaining 1
Patrick Harris,
Secretary.