SB223
190015-1
By Senator Sanders
RFD: Judiciary
First Read: 25-JAN-18
190015-1:n:01/22/2018:MA/tj LSA2018-347
SYNOPSIS:          Under existing law, there is no provision
prohibiting a person who has been convicted of a
felony or misdemeanor offense and sentenced to an
additional penalty for committing a crime motivated
by a victim's race, national origin, ethnicity, or
disability from owning, possessing, or controlling
a firearm.
This bill would prohibit a person convicted
of a felony or misdemeanor offense and who is
sentenced to an additional penalty for committing a
crime motivated by a victim's race, national
origin, ethnicity, or physical or mental disability
under existing law, from owning, possessing, or
controlling a firearm.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
To amend Section 13A-11-72, Code of Alabama 1975, to
prohibit a person convicted of a felony or misdemeanor offense
for which he or she is sentenced to an additional penalty for
committing a crime motivated by a victim's race, national
origin, ethnicity, or physical or mental disability from
owning, possessing, or controlling a firearm.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Section 13A-11-72, Code of Alabama 1975,
is amended to read as follows:
"ยง13A-11-72.
"(a) No person who has been convicted in this state
or elsewhere of committing or attempting to commit a crime of
violence, misdemeanor offense of domestic violence, violent
offense as listed in Section 12-25-32(15), anyone who is
subject to a valid protection order for domestic abuse, anyone
who has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor offense and
sentenced to an additional penalty pursuant to Section
13A-5-13, or anyone of unsound mind shall own a firearm or
have one in his or her possession or under his or her control.
"(b) No person who is a minor, except under the
circumstances provided in this section, a drug addict, or an
habitual drunkard shall own a pistol or have one in his or her
possession or under his or her control.
"(c) Subject to the exceptions provided by Section
13A-11-74, no person shall knowingly with intent to do bodily
harm carry or possess a deadly weapon on the premises of a
public school.
"(d) Possession of a deadly weapon with the intent
to do bodily harm on the premises of a public school in
violation of subsection (c) of this section is a Class C
felony.
"(e) School security personnel and school resource
officers qualified under subsection (a) of Section 16-1-44.1,
employed by a local board of education, and authorized by the
employing local board of education to carry a deadly weapon
while on duty are exempt from subsection (c) of this section.
Law enforcement officers are exempt from this section, and
persons with pistol permits issued pursuant to Section
13A-11-75, are exempt from subsection (c) of this section.
"(f) A person shall not be in violation of Section
13A-11-57 or 13A-11-76 and a minor shall not be in violation
of this section if the minor has permission to possess a
pistol from a parent or legal guardian who is not prohibited
from possessing a firearm under state or federal law, and any
of the following are satisfied:
"(1) The minor is attending a hunter education
course or a firearms safety course under the supervision of an
adult who is not prohibited from possessing a firearm under
state or federal law.
"(2) The minor is engaging in practice in the use of
a firearm or target shooting at an established range under the
supervision of an adult who is not prohibited from possessing
a firearm under state or federal law.
"(3) The minor is engaging in an organized
competition involving the use of a firearm or participating in
or practicing for a performance by an organized group under 26
U.S.C. ยง 501(c)(3) which uses firearms as part of the
performance.
"(4) The minor is hunting or fishing pursuant to a
valid license, if required, and the person has the license in
his or her possession; has written permission of the owner or
legal possessor of the land on which the activities are being
conducted; and the pistol, when loaded, is carried only in a
manner discernible by ordinary observation.
"(5) The minor is on real property under the control
of the minor's parent, legal guardian, or grandparent.
"(6) The minor is a member of the armed services or
National Guard and the minor is acting in the line of duty.
"(7) The minor is traveling by motor vehicle to any
of the locations or activities listed in subdivisions (1)
through (6), has written permission to possess the pistol by
his or her parent or legal guardian, and the pistol is
unloaded, locked in a compartment or container that is in or
affixed securely to the motor vehicle and is out of reach of
the driver and any passenger in the motor vehicle.
"(g) This section does not apply to a minor who uses
a pistol while acting in self-defense of himself or herself or
other persons against an intruder into the residence of the
minor or a residence in which the minor is an invited guest.
"(h) The term "school resource officer" as used in
this section means an Alabama Peace Officers' Standards and
Training Commissioner-certified law enforcement officer
employed by a law enforcement agency who is specifically
selected and specially trained for the school setting.
"(i) The term "public school" as used in this
section applies only to a school composed of grades K-12 and
shall include a school bus used for grades K-12.
"(j) The term "deadly weapon" as used in this
section means a firearm or anything manifestly designed, made,
or adapted for the purposes of inflicting death or serious
physical injury, and such term includes, but is not limited
to, a bazooka, hand grenade, missile, or explosive or
incendiary device; a pistol, rifle, or shotgun; or a
switch-blade knife, gravity knife, stiletto, sword, or dagger;
or any club, baton, billy, black-jack, bludgeon, or metal
knuckles.
"(k)(1) The term "convicted" as used in this section
requires that the person was represented by counsel in the
case, or knowingly and intelligently waived the right to
counsel in the case if required by law, and either the case
was tried before a judge, tried by a jury, or the person
knowingly and intelligently waived the right to have the case
tried, by guilty plea or otherwise.
"(2) A person may not be considered to have been
convicted for the purposes of this section if the person is
not considered to have been convicted in the jurisdiction in
which the proceedings were held or the conviction has been
expunged, set aside, or is of an offense for which the person
has been pardoned or has had civil rights restored, unless the
pardon, expungement, or restoration of civil rights expressly
provides that the person may not ship, transport, possess, or
receive firearms.
"(l) The term "misdemeanor offense of domestic
violence" as used in this section means a misdemeanor offense
that has, as its elements, the use or attempted use of
physical force or the threatened use of a dangerous instrument
or deadly weapon, and the victim is a current or former
spouse, parent, child, person with whom the defendant has a
child in common, or a present or former household member.
"(m) The term "valid protection order" as used in
this section means an order issued after a hearing of which
the person received actual notice, and at which the person had
an opportunity to participate, that does any of the following:
"(1) Restrains the person from harassing, stalking,
or threatening a qualified individual or child of the
qualified individual or person or engaging in other conduct
that would place a qualified individual in reasonable fear of
bodily injury to the individual or child and that includes a
finding that the person represents a credible threat to the
physical safety of the qualified individual or child.
"(2) By its terms, explicitly prohibits the use,
attempted use, or threatened use of physical force against the
qualified individual or child that would reasonably be
expected to cause bodily injury.
"(n) The term "qualified individual" as used in
subsection (m), means a spouse or former spouse of the person,
an individual who is a parent of a child of the person, or an
individual who cohabitates or has cohabited with the person.
"(o) The term "unsound mind" as used in this section
includes any person who is subject to any of the findings
listed below, and who has not had his or her rights to possess
a firearm reinstated by operation of law or legal process:
"(1) Found by a court, board, commission, or other
lawful authority that, as a result of marked subnormal
intelligence, mental illness, incompetency, condition, or
disease, is a danger to himself or herself or others or lacks
the mental capacity to contract or manage his or her own
affairs.
"(2) Found to be insane, not guilty by reason of
mental disease or defect, found mentally incompetent to stand
trial, or found not guilty by a reason of lack of mental
responsibility by a court in a criminal case, to include
state, federal and military courts.
"(3) Involuntarily committed for a final commitment
for inpatient treatment to the Department of Mental Health or
a Veterans' Administration hospital by a court after a
hearing."
Section 2. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.