SB183
189023-1
By Senators Williams and Dial (N & P)
RFD: Local Legislation
First Read: 16-JAN-18
189023-1:n:12/04/2017:JET/bm LSA2017-3645
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
Relating to Cherokee County; authorizing the sheriff
to sell certain abandoned, stolen, and unclaimed property at
public auction; providing for such an auction and for the
disposition of proceeds; and authorizing the sheriff to sell
or destroy certain abandoned, stolen, or unclaimed firearms.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. (a) The Sheriff of Cherokee County shall
keep and maintain a record of all abandoned and stolen
personal property recovered by the sheriff's office. These
records shall state the description of the property, the date
of recovery of the property, and the serial or other
identifying number of the property. The records shall be open
to public inspection at all reasonable times.
(b) All abandoned or stolen property recovered by
the sheriff's office shall be stored in a suitable place to
protect the property from deterioration.
Section 2. If the abandoned or stolen personal
property is of a perishable nature and reasonable attempts to
locate and identify the owner of the property are not
successful, the property may be sold at once without notice.
The sheriff shall attempt to obtain the best possible price
for the property. The proceeds of such a sale shall be held in
a separate account for a period of six months for the owner.
During this period, the proceeds will be paid to the owner
upon demand, less any cost of recovery, storage, maintenance,
and sale. If the proceeds are not claimed within six months,
after deducting and paying all expenses incurred in the
recovery, storage, maintenance, and sale of the property, the
net funds shall be paid to the office of the Sheriff of
Cherokee County.
Section 3. (a) The sheriff shall keep and maintain a
permanent record of all abandoned or stolen firearms, not
subject to disposition by general law. The records shall state
the description of the firearm, the date of recovery of the
firearm, and the serial or other identifying number, if any,
of the firearm. Firearm as used in this act shall have the
same meaning as defined in Section 13A-8-1 of the Code of
Alabama 1975.
(b) Unless otherwise provided by law, the sheriff
may sell or destroy these firearms if the owner of the firearm
does not claim the firearm within six months of the date the
sheriff obtained it.
(c) The sheriff may sell the firearms only to gun
dealers who have held an active business license for at least
one year immediately prior to the date of the sale. The
sheriff shall establish a procedure to notify gun dealers of a
sale. A firearm shall be sold to the gun dealer submitting the
highest sealed bid unless the firearm is being traded in to a
public safety firearm store. The proceeds of the sale, after
deducting and paying all expenses incurred in the recovery,
maintenance, and sale of the firearms, shall be paid to the
Sheriff's Office Law Enforcement Fund of Cherokee County.
(d) The sheriff may establish a procedure to destroy
firearms and may expend necessary sheriff's office funds for
that purpose.
(e) Any firearm held by the sheriff on the effective
date of this act shall be subject to this section, but shall
be held for at least six months after the effective date of
this act.
Section 4. (a) As often as necessary, the sheriff
shall sell at public auction, including an internet auction,
to the highest bidder all abandoned or stolen personal
property, other than firearms, which has been recovered by the
sheriff's office and has remained unclaimed by the rightful
owner for a six-month period.
(b) Prior to the sale, notice shall be given by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in Cherokee
County once a week for two successive weeks or by posting
notice in a conspicuous place at the Cherokee County
Courthouse and by posting on the sheriff's office website for
a period of at least 20 days. The notice shall contain the
place, date, and time of each auction and a general
description of items of personal property to be sold at the
auction. If publication of notice is made in the newspaper,
the first notice shall run at least 20 days prior to the
auction.
Section 5. The owner of any abandoned or stolen
personal property recovered by the Cherokee County Sheriff's
Office, including firearms, may claim the property at any time
prior to its sale by submitting sufficient proof of ownership
as determined by the sheriff. The sheriff may require the
owner to pay a pro rata share of the costs, if any, of
publication of notice of the sale of the property.
Section 6. If property is sold at public auction, as
provided in this act, a notation in the storage record shall
be made of the sale and of the amount received for the
property. The person making the sale may reject any and all
bids if the amount bid is unreasonably low and may continue
the sale, from time to time, if no bidders are present.
Section 7. The proceeds from the sale of property at
an auction conducted under the authority of this act, after
deducting and paying all expenses incurred in the recovery,
storage, maintenance, and sale of property, shall be paid to
the Sheriff's Office Law Enforcement Fund of Cherokee County
and shall be used solely for law enforcement purposes. The
receipts and expenditures of funds shall be audited by the
Examiners of Public Accounts.
Section 8. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.