HB398
189283-3
By Representative Poole
RFD: Judiciary
First Read: 08-FEB-18
ENGROSSED
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
To amend Section 11-52-81, Code of Alabama 1975,
relating to appeals of decisions by a board of zoning
adjustment; to provide that an aggrieved party can file an
appeal with the circuit court in the county where the board
convenes; to require notice be given to the board of the
filing of an appeal; and to require the board to send a
transcript of the proceeding to the circuit court within a
certain time frame.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Section 11-52-81, Code of Alabama 1975,
is amended to read as follows:
"ยง11-52-81.
"Any party aggrieved by virtue of any final judgment
or decision of such a board of zoning adjustment may appeal
the judgment or decision by filing an a written notice of
appeal therefrom in the circuit court in the county where the
board convenes within 15 days thereafter appeal therefrom to
the circuit court by filing with such board a written notice
of appeal specifying the judgment or decision from which the
appeal is taken of any judgment or decision of the board. In
the case of such an appeal, the court shall send notice of the
appeal to the board, such the board shall cause certify a
transcript of the proceedings in the action to be certified to
the court to which the appeal is taken within 30 days of the
filing of the appeal, and the action in such court appeal
shall be tried de novo."
Section 2. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.
House of Representatives
Read for the first time and re-
ferred to the House of Representa-
tives committee on Judiciary ......    ....... 08-FEB-18
Read for the second time and placed
on the calendar 1 amendment ......     ....... 01-MAR-18
Read for the third time and passed
as amended.........................    ....... 15-MAR-18
Yeas 96, Nays 0, Abstains 0
Jeff Woodard
Clerk