HB166
189312-2
By Representatives Davis, Sanderford, Faust, Jackson,
Nordgren, Shedd, Wilcox, Bracy, Buskey, Ingram, Polizos,
Greer, Drake and Collins
RFD: Boards, Agencies and Commissions
First Read: 11-JAN-18
ENGROSSED
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
Relating to the Board of Marriage and Family
Therapy; to amend Section 34-17A-3 of the Code of Alabama
1975, to further define the practice of marriage and family
therapy.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Section 34-17A-3 of the Code of Alabama
1975, is amended to read as follows:
"ยง34-17A-3.
"As used in this chapter, the following words have
the following meanings:
"(1) ADVERTISE. The issuing or causing to be
distributed any card, sign, or device to any person; or the
causing, permitting, or allowing any sign or marking on or in
any building, radio or television, transmission or broadcast,
or advertising by any media or other means designed to secure
public attention.
"(2) BOARD. The Alabama Board of Examiners in
Marriage and Family Therapy.
"(3) MARRIAGE AND FAMILY THERAPIST. A person to whom
a valid, current license has been issued pursuant to this
chapter.
"(4) PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation,
partnership, organization, political body, or other entity.
"(5) PRACTICE OF MARRIAGE AND FAMILY THERAPY. The
process of providing professional marriage and family therapy
to individuals, couples, and families, either alone or in a
group or in a school system. The practice of marriage and
family therapy utilizes established principles that recognize
the interrelated nature of the individual problems and
dysfunctions in family members in order to diagnose, assess,
understand, and treat emotional and mental problems mental and
emotional disorders. Marriage and family therapy includes,
without being limited to, individual, group, couple, sexual,
family, and divorce therapy, and psychotherapy, whether the
services are offered directly to the general public or through
organizations, either public or private, for a fee or other
compensation. Marriage and family therapy is a specialized
mode of treatment for the purpose of resolving mental and
emotional problems disorders and modifying intrapersonal and
interpersonal dysfunctions. The terms "diagnose," "assess" and
"treat" as used in this subdivision, when considered in
isolation or in conjunction with the rules of the board, shall
not be construed to permit the performance of any act which
marriage and family therapists are not educated and trained to
perform, including, but not limited to, administering and
interpreting psychological tests, intellectual,
neuropsychological, personality, and projective instruments,
admitting persons to hospitals for treatment for the foregoing
conditions, treating persons in hospitals without medical
supervision, prescribing medicinal drugs, authorizing clinical
laboratory procedures or radiological procedures, or use of
electroconvulsive therapy. In addition, this definition shall
not be construed to permit any person licensed pursuant to
this chapter to describe or label any test, report, or
procedure as "psychological," or as a "psychological
evaluation."
"(6) QUALIFIED SUPERVISION. The supervision of
clinical services in accordance with standards established by
the board. The supervisor shall be recognized by the board as
an approved supervisor.
"(7) RECOGNIZED EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION. Any
educational institution which grants a bachelor's, master's,
or doctoral degree and which is recognized by the board and by
a regional educational accrediting body or a postgraduate
training institute accredited by the Commission on
Accreditation for Marriage and Family Therapy Education.
"(8) USE A TITLE OR DESCRIPTION. To hold oneself out
to the public as having a particular status by means of
stating on signs, mailboxes, address plates, stationery
announcements, calling cards, or other instruments of
professional identification."
Section 2. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.
House of Representatives
Read for the first time and re-
ferred to the House of Representa-
tives committee on Boards, Agencies
and Commissions....................    ....... 11-JAN-18
Read for the second time and placed
on the calendar....................    ....... 25-JAN-18
Read for the third time and passed
as amended.........................    ....... 06-FEB-18
Yeas 68, Nays 14, Abstains 5
Jeff Woodard
Clerk