HB112
189469-1
By Representative Ford (Constitutional Amendment)
RFD: Economic Development and Tourism
First Read: 09-JAN-18
189469-1:n:01/08/2018:JLB/th LRS2018-83
SYNOPSIS:          Under existing law, lotteries and gift
enterprises are prohibited.
This bill would propose an amendment to
Section 65 of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901,
to establish an Alabama Lottery to fund
scholarships and to create an Alabama Lottery
Corporation to implement and to regulate the
operation of the lottery.
The amendment dedicates the net proceeds
from the lottery to the Lottery Trust Fund for
scholarships for students to attend a public two-
or four-year college located in Alabama.
The amendment also establishes the Lottery
Trust Fund and authorizes the Legislature to pass
general laws to implement the amendment.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
Proposing an amendment to Section 65 of the
Constitution of Alabama of 1901, now appearing as Section 65
of the Official Recompilation of the Constitution of Alabama
of 1901, as amended, to establish an Alabama Lottery; to
establish an Alabama Lottery Corporation; to establish the
Lottery Trust Fund; to provide for the allocation of the
lottery proceeds to the Lottery Trust Fund for scholarships
for students to attend a public two- or four-year college
located in Alabama; and to authorize the Legislature to
implement the amendment through enabling legislation.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. The following amendment to the
Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as amended, is proposed and
shall become valid as a part thereof when approved by a
majority of the qualified electors voting thereon and in
accordance with Sections 284, 285, and 287 of the Constitution
of Alabama of 1901, now appearing as Sections 284, 285 and 287
of the Official Recompilation of the Constitution of Alabama
of 1901, as amended:
PROPOSED AMENDMENT
Section 65 of Article IV of the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, as amended, is amended to read as follows:
"Section 65.
"PART I.
"The Except as provided in Part II of this
amendment, the Legislature shall have no power to authorize
lotteries or gift enterprises for any purposes, and shall pass
laws to prohibit the sale in this state of lottery or gift
enterprise tickets, or tickets in any scheme in the nature of
a lottery; and all acts, or parts of acts heretofore passed by
the Legislature of this state, authorizing a lottery or
lotteries, and all acts amendatory thereof, or supplemental
thereto, are hereby avoided.
"PART II.
"(a) Establishment of an Alabama Lottery.
"The Legislature, by general law, shall provide for
the establishment, administration, operation, and regulation
of an Alabama Lottery.
"(b) Lottery Trust Fund.
"The proceeds from the Alabama Lottery shall be
applied first to the payment of the expenses of administering
and operating the Alabama Lottery, including, without
limitation, the payment of all prizes, without any further
appropriation required by law, and the balance of the proceeds
remaining after the payments shall be deposited, as provided
by general law, and held in a special, separate account in the
State Treasury hereby created and designated the Lottery Trust
Fund until such time as the proceeds are disbursed pursuant to
this amendment.
"(c) Alabama Lottery Corporation.
"The administration of the Alabama Lottery shall be
vested in a corporation hereby created and designated the
Alabama Lottery Corporation. The duties, powers, authority,
and composition of the Alabama Lottery Corporation shall be
provided by general law.
"(d) Allocations and Disbursements.
"(1) Monies in the Lottery Trust Fund shall be
allocated exclusively to provide scholarships for up to two
years to citizens of Alabama to attend two- and four-year
public institutions of higher education located in Alabama.
"(e) Agreements with other Jurisdictions.
"The Alabama Lottery Corporation may enter into
reciprocal agreements with other jurisdictions for the
operation and promotion of games that are permitted to be
operated, utilized, or conducted by the Alabama Lottery.
"(f) Limitation on Activities.
"The Alabama Lottery may authorize, conduct, employ,
or utilize only those games of chance approved by the Alabama
Lottery Corporation which may include, without limitation, the
sale of lottery tickets.
"(g) Implementation.
"The Legislature may enforce and implement this
amendment by appropriate general law. Any act or acts that are
enacted by the Legislature during the same session of the
Legislature at which this amendment is proposed and which are
in implementation and furtherance of the purposes of this
amendment and the authority granted by this amendment, and all
actions heretofore taken pursuant to such act or acts, are
hereby validated, ratified, and confirmed as effective as of
the date on which the act or acts were so enacted in
accordance with the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as
amended, and as of the respective dates on which such actions
were taken.
"(h) Nothing in this amendment affects, prohibits,
or limits any activity that was legal at the time this
amendment becomes effective including, without limitation,
pari-mutuel betting and bingo as provided for by specific
laws.
"(i) This amendment and any enabling legislation
enacted by the Legislature with respect to this amendment
supersedes and takes precedence over any other provision of
law that may conflict or be inconsistent with this amendment
or the legislation, and this amendment and the legislation
shall operate and be construed without regard to the conflict
or inconsistency."
Section 2. An election upon the above proposed
amendment shall be held, in accordance with the provisions of
Sections 284 and 285 of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901,
now appearing as Sections 284 and 285 of the Official
Recompilation of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as
amended, and the general election laws of Alabama.
Section 3. The appropriate election official shall
assign a ballot number for the proposed constitutional
amendment on the election ballot and shall set forth the
following description on the proposed constitutional
amendment:
"Proposing an amendment to the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, to establish an Alabama Lottery and an
Alabama Lottery Trust Fund, to distribute net lottery proceeds
to provide scholarships for qualifying students to attend a
public two- or four-year college located in Alabama; to create
an Alabama Lottery Corporation to regulate and administer the
lottery; and to allow the Legislature to implement the Alabama
Lottery through appropriate general law."
This description shall be followed by the following
language:
"Yes ( )   No ( )."