HB265
189146-2
By Representatives Shiver, Faust and Baker (N & P)
RFD: Baldwin County Legislation
First Read: 23-JAN-18
ENROLLED, An Act,
Relating to Baldwin County; to amend Section
45-2-80.83 of the Code of Alabama 1975, relating to the
Baldwin County Law Library and Judicial Administration Fund;
to further provide for retirement for a part-time law
librarian.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Section 45-2-80.83 of the Code of Alabama
1975, is amended to read as follows:
"ยง45-2-80.83.
"(a) The sums to be paid to the Baldwin County
Commission, as herein provided, shall be kept in a special
fund designated as the Baldwin County Law Library and Judicial
Administration Fund and shall be expended by the Presiding
Circuit Judge of the Circuit Court of Baldwin County, to
create, establish, and maintain the law library and to provide
for the more effective administration of justice, including,
but not limited to: Paying the costs of securing the advice
and attendance of witnesses; registration fees and other
actual expenses incurred in attending seminars, institutes,
conferences, and other meetings in connection with continuing
legal and judicial education, membership fees, or dues in
legal and judicial organizations; paying the salaries of court
employees when necessary for the efficient operation of the
courts; and any other actual and necessary expenses incurred
by the judges of the circuit in promoting legal and judicial
competency. The presiding circuit judge shall draw warrants on
the county for expenditures by indicating on the warrants the
funds against which the warrants are to be drawn. One dollar
fifty cents ($1.50) from each fee in the fund shall be used
primarily to purchase books, periodicals, and other library
fixtures and equipment as, in the opinion of the presiding
circuit judge, may be advisable, but to the extent not so used
the funds may be otherwise expended for the maintenance of the
library. Thirteen dollars fifty cents ($13.50) from each fee
in the fund shall be used for the purposes of judicial
administration as provided in this section. The management of
the law library is and shall be vested in the Presiding Judge
of the Circuit Court of Baldwin County, and all books,
periodicals, reports, and other property purchased with the
funds produced by this subpart shall be the property of
Baldwin County. The presiding judge may from time to time sell
or exchange the books, reports, periodicals, and personal
property as may be necessary to keep the library up to date
and apply the proceeds of the sale thereof or the value
thereof upon the purchase of other books, reports,
periodicals, and personal property for use in the library. The
presiding judge of the circuit court may accept any gift or
loan of any books, reports, periodicals, and other property
for public use in the library upon the terms and conditions as
may be stipulated by the donor or lender thereof and as may be
agreeable to the judge. The presiding circuit judge may
designate the clerk of the circuit court or any other suitable
person to operate or assist in the operation of the library.
The funds established by this subpart shall be audited in the
same manner as other county funds are audited.
"(b)(1) A person employed by the presiding circuit
judge for 20 hours a week as a law librarian to operate or
assist in the operation of the law library shall be eligible
to participate in the Employees' Retirement System of Alabama.
"(2) Any funds necessary for the administration of
this subsection shall be taken from the Baldwin County Law
Library Operating Fund and shall be paid to the Baldwin County
Commission."
Section 2. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.
Speaker of the House of Representatives
President and Presiding Officer of the Senate
House of Representatives
I hereby certify that the within Act originated in
and was passed by the House 13-FEB-18.
Jeff Woodard
Clerk
Senate                22-MAR-18                        Passed