SB26
192297-4
By Senator Chambliss
RFD: Education and Youth Affairs
First Read: 09-JAN-18
PFD: 12/05/2017
SB26
ENROLLED, An Act,
Relating to the Alabama Sex Offender Registration
and Community Notification Act; to create Annalyn's Law; to
amend Sections 15-20A-27, as last amended by Act 2017-414,
2017 Regular Session, and 15-20A-30, Code of Alabama 1975; to
require local law enforcement to notify the local
superintendent of education when a low-risk juvenile sex
offender is planning to establish or has established a fixed
residence within the jurisdiction of the board; to require
juvenile sex offenders to notify local law enforcement of any
change in school attendance; to further provide that failure
to comply, unless otherwise provided, constitutes a Class C
felony; to require the State Board of Education to develop,
and each local board of education to adopt, a comprehensive
model policy for the supervision and monitoring of low risk
juvenile sex offender students attending school with the
general student population; to require alternative educational
placement for any juvenile sex offender who is a moderate or
high risk for re-offense; to amend Sections 15-20A-5, as last
amended by Act 2017-414, 2017 Regular Session, 15-20A-6, and
15-20A-44, Code of Alabama 1975, to correct a technical error
in the list of offenses constituting sex offenses, and to
correct internal citations to the corrected section; and in
connection therewith would have as its purpose or effect the
requirement of a new or increased expenditure of local funds
within the meaning of Amendment 621 of the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, now appearing as Section 111.05 of the
Official Recompilation of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901,
as amended.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Sections 1 to 3, inclusive, of this act
shall be known and may be cited as Annalyn's Law.
Section 2. Sections 15-20A-27, as last amended by
Act 2017-414, 2017 Regular Session, and 15-20A-30 of the Code
of Alabama 1975, are amended to read as follows:
"§15-20A-27.
"(a) In determining whether to apply notification
requirements to a juvenile sex offender, the sentencing court
shall consider any of the following factors relevant to the
risk of re-offense:
"(1) Conditions of release that minimize the risk of
re-offense, including, but not limited to, whether the
juvenile sex offender is under supervision of probation,
parole, or aftercare; receiving counseling, therapy, or
treatment; or residing in a home situation that provides
guidance and supervision.
"(2) Physical conditions that minimize the risk of
re-offense, including, but not limited to, advanced age or
debilitating illness.
"(3) Criminal history factors indicative of high
risk of re-offense, including whether the conduct of the
juvenile sex offender was found to be characterized by
repetitive and compulsive behavior.
"(4) Whether psychological or psychiatric profiles
indicate a risk of recidivism.
"(5) The relationship between the juvenile sex
offender and the victim.
"(6) The particular facts and circumstances
surrounding the offense.
"(7) The level of planning and participation in the
offense.
"(8) Whether the offense involved the use of a
weapon, violence, or infliction of serious bodily injury.
"(9) The number, date, and nature of prior offenses.
"(10) The response to treatment of the juvenile sex
offender.
"(11) Recent behavior, including behavior while
confined or while under supervision in the community.
"(12) Recent threats against persons or expressions
of intent to commit additional crimes.
"(13) The protection of society.
"(14) Any other factors deemed relevant by the
court.
"(b) If the sentencing court determines that the
juvenile sex offender shall be subject to notification, the
level of notification shall be applied as follows:
"(1) If the risk of re-offense is low, notification
that the juvenile sex offender will be establishing or has
established a fixed residence shall be provided by local law
enforcement to the principal of the public or nonpublic school
where the juvenile sex offender will attend after release and,
if a public school, to the local superintendent of education
with jurisdiction over that school. This notification shall
include the name, actual living address, date of birth of the
juvenile sex offender, and a statement of the sex offense for
which he or she has been adjudicated delinquent, including the
age and gender of the victim. This information shall be
considered confidential by the school and the local
superintendent of education and be shared only with the
teachers and staff with supervision over the juvenile sex
offender.   Whoever, except as specifically provided herein,
directly or indirectly discloses or makes use of or knowingly
permits the use of information concerning a juvenile sex
offender described in this section, upon conviction thereof,
shall be guilty of a Class C felony within the jurisdiction of
the juvenile court.
"(2) If the risk of re-offense is moderate,
notification that the juvenile sex offender will be
establishing, or has established, a fixed residence shall be
provided by local law enforcement to all schools and childcare
facilities within three miles of the declared fixed residence
of the juvenile sex offender. A community notification flyer
shall be mailed by regular mail or hand delivered to all
schools or childcare facilities as required by this
subsection. No other method may be used to disseminate this
information.
"(3) If the risk of re-offense is high, the public
shall receive notification as though the juvenile sex offender
were an adult sex offender in accordance with Section
15-20A-21.
"(c) The sentencing court shall enter an order
stating whether the juvenile sex offender shall be subject to
notification and the level of notification that shall be
applied. The court shall provide a copy of the order to the
prosecuting attorney and to the Alabama State Law Enforcement
Agency.
"(d) The determination of notification by the
sentencing court shall not be subject to appeal.
"§15-20A-30.
"(a) Immediately upon release or immediately upon
adjudication of delinquency if the juvenile sex offender is
not committed, the juvenile sex offender and the parent,
custodian, or guardian shall register all required
registration information with local law enforcement in each
county in which the juvenile sex offender resides or intends
to reside.
"(b) Whenever a juvenile sex offender establishes a
new residence, the juvenile sex offender and the parent,
custodian, or guardian of the juvenile sex offender shall
immediately appear in person to register all required
registration information with local law enforcement in each
county of residence.
"(c) If the parent, custodian, or guardian of a
juvenile sex offender transfers or terminates the residence of
the juvenile sex offender, or the custody of the juvenile sex
offender is changed to a different parent, custodian, or
guardian resulting in a transfer of residence, the original
parent, custodian, or guardian with custody shall immediately
notify local law enforcement in each county of residence.
"(d) Whenever a juvenile sex offender changes any
required registration information including, but not limited
to, his or her school attendance status, the juvenile sex
offender and the parent, custodian, or guardian of the
juvenile sex offender shall immediately appear in person to
update the required registration information with local law
enforcement in each county in which the juvenile sex offender
resides.
"(e) A juvenile sex offender required to register
for life pursuant to Section 15-20A-28 shall appear in person
with his or her parent, custodian, or guardian to verify all
required registration information during the birth month of
the juvenile sex offender and every three months thereafter
with the local law enforcement in each county of residence
unless the juvenile sex offender has been relieved from
registration requirements pursuant to Section 15-20A-34.
"(f) A juvenile sex offender required to register
for 10 years pursuant to Section 15-20A-28 shall appear in
person with his or her parent, custodian, or guardian to
verify all required registration information during the birth
month of the juvenile sex offender and every year thereafter
with local law enforcement in each county of residence unless
the juvenile sex offender has been relieved from registration
requirements pursuant to Section 15-20A-24.
"(g) At the time of registration, the juvenile sex
offender shall be provided a form explaining all duties and
any restrictions placed on the juvenile sex offender. The
juvenile sex offender and the parent, custodian, or guardian
of the juvenile sex offender shall read and sign this form
stating that he or she understands the duties and restrictions
placed on the juvenile sex offender and his or her parent,
custodian, or guardian.
"(h) When a juvenile sex offender becomes the age of
majority, the parent, custodian, or guardian of the juvenile
sex offender shall no longer be subject to the requirements of
this section, and the juvenile sex offender shall instead be
solely responsible for the requirements in this section.
"(i) A person who knowingly violates this section
shall be guilty of a Class C felony."
Section 3. (a)(1) On or before January 1, 2019, the
State Board of Education shall develop a comprehensive model
policy for the supervision and monitoring of juvenile sex
offender students, who have a low risk of re-offense and are
enrolled, attending class, and participating in school
activities with the general population of students. The
purpose of the model policy is to provide a safe and secure
environment for all students and staff. The model policy shall
be adopted by each local board of education and implemented
beginning with the 2020-2021 school year. The model policy, at
a minimum, shall contain all of the following components:
a. Application to all school property and
school-sponsored functions including, but not limited to,
classroom instructional time, assemblies, athletic events,
extracurricular activities, and school bus transportation.
b. An initial meeting of all parties immediately
upon the enrollment of the low risk juvenile sex offender, and
frequent meetings thereafter as necessary to provide for the
continual monitoring of the student and a safe school
environment for all. The principal and all appropriate school
personnel who have received confidential notification pursuant
to subdivision (1) of subsection (b) of Section 15-20A-27,
Code of Alabama 1975, in consultation with juvenile probation
professionals, shall meet with the student, and the parent or
guardian of the student, to create and implement an
individualized student safety plan. The principal shall
determine other appropriate school personnel to be included in
the meetings to assist in defining school expectations.
Student safety plans shall outline the responsibilities of all
parties in safely managing the behavior of the student and
protecting all students. The plan shall be consistent with
existing disciplinary policies and procedures, student conduct
policies, and mandatory reporting policies. Student safety
plans shall include, but not be limited to, all of the
following:
1. An outline of conditions or limitations, or both,
on the low risk juvenile sex offender concerning his or her
interactions on school property and when participating in
school activities.
2. An effective procedure, developed in conjunction
with school staff in consultation with the parent or guardian
of the student, for communicating concerns relating to the
student.
3. Guidelines for expected intervention actions for
high-risk behaviors and for reinforcing positive behaviors
based on the needs of the student and the safety of all
students and staff.
4. Procedures for the continual review of each plan
by staff designated by the principal and for monitoring and
changing the plan on an as-needed basis by school staff.
5. Safeguards for protecting confidential
information.
c. Continuity of information and monitoring of
low-risk juvenile sex offender students over time as the
students change schools and as administrators and school
personnel change.
d. Comprehensive training for school personnel to
take appropriate action upon noticing an increase or
escalation of those behaviors in a low risk juvenile sex
offender student, both for the short and long-term safety of
that student and all other students.
e. In addition to the mandatory reporting
requirements pursuant to Section 26-14-3, Code of Alabama
1975, school personnel shall report violations of plan
expectations to the principal when they occur. Upon
notification, the principal, as appropriate, shall follow the
procedures and intervention actions detailed in the safety
plan created pursuant to this section.
(2) When a low risk juvenile sex offender student
changes schools, the principal shall notify local law
enforcement and local law enforcement shall notify the
principal of the new school and, where applicable, the local
superintendent of education pursuant to subsection (b) of
Section 15-20A-27, Code of Alabama 1975. The principal of the
prior school shall ensure that all records and safety plans
pertaining to the low risk juvenile sex offender student
follow the student to his or her new school. If the sex
offender status or probation or parole status of the student
changes, the principal shall notify the appropriate school
staff as part of the safety planning of the school. The
principal and school staff shall maintain confidentiality
regarding these students as required by law. Any information
received by a principal, school personnel, or local
superintendent of education as a result of a notification is
confidential and may not be further disseminated except as
provided in Section 15-20A-27, Code of Alabama 1975, and other
state law and the Family and Educational and Privacy Rights
Act of 1994, 20 U.S. Code Section 1232g et. seq. Any school
district employee who releases information in compliance with
state and federal law is immune from civil liability in
accordance with Section 36-1-12, Code of Alabama 1975.
(b)(1) The sentencing court shall have the
discretion to determine whether a juvenile sex offender
classified as having a moderate or high risk or reoffending
should return to a public school. Upon making this
determination, the court shall consult with a juvenile
probation officer and the local superintendent of education to
determine appropriate educational placement.
(2) Any alternative placement of a student with a
disability who receives special education services shall be
made in compliance with the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act, 20 U.S.C. §1400 et seq., and its implementing
regulations, 34 C.F.R. Part 300.
Section 4. Sections 15-20A-5, as last amended by Act
2017-414, 2017 Regular Session, 15-20A-6, and 15-20A-44 of the
Code of Alabama 1975, are amended to read as follows:
"§15-20A-5.
"For the purposes of this chapter, a sex offense
includes any of the following offenses:
"(1) Rape in the first degree, as provided by
Section 13A-6-61.
"(2) Rape in the second degree, as provided by
Section 13A-6-62.
"(3) Sodomy in the first degree, as provided by
Section 13A-6-63.
"(4) Sodomy in the second degree, as provided by
Section 13A-6-64.
"(5) Sexual misconduct, as provided by Section
13A-6-65, provided that on a first conviction or adjudication
the sex offender is only subject to registration and
verification pursuant to this chapter. On a second or
subsequent conviction or adjudication of a sex offense, if the
second or subsequent conviction or adjudication does not arise
out of the same set of facts and circumstances as the first
conviction or adjudication of a sex offense, the sex offender
shall comply with all requirements of this chapter. The
sentencing court may exempt from this chapter a juvenile sex
offender adjudicated delinquent of sexual misconduct.
"(6) Sexual torture, as provided by Section
13A-6-65.1.
"(7) Sexual abuse in the first degree, as provided
by Section 13A-6-66.
"(8) Sexual abuse in the second degree, as provided
by Section 13A-6-67.
"(9) Indecent exposure, as provided by Section
13A-6-68, provided that on a first conviction or adjudication
of a sex offense, the sex offender is only subject to
registration and verification pursuant to this chapter. On a
second or subsequent conviction or adjudication of a sex
offense, if the second or subsequent conviction or
adjudication does not arise out of the same set of facts and
circumstances as the first conviction or adjudication, the sex
offender shall comply with all requirements of this chapter.
The sentencing court may exempt from this chapter a juvenile
sex offender adjudicated delinquent of indecent exposure.
"(10) Enticing a child to enter a vehicle, room,
house, office, or other place for immoral purposes, as
provided by Section 13A-6-69.
"(11) Sexual abuse of a child less than 12 years
old, as provided by Section 13A-6-69.1.
"(12) Promoting prostitution in the first degree, as
provided by Section 13A-12-111.
"(13) Promoting prostitution in the second degree,
as provided by Section 13A-12-112.
"(14) Violation of the Alabama Child Pornography
Act, as provided by Section 13A-12-191, 13A-12-192,
13A-12-196, or 13A-12-197. The sentencing court may exempt
from this chapter a juvenile sex offender adjudicated
delinquent of a violation of the Alabama Child Pornography Act
after the juvenile has been counseled on the dangers of the
conduct for which he or she was adjudicated delinquent.
"(15) Unlawful imprisonment in the first degree, as
provided by Section 13A-6-41, if the victim of the offense is
a minor, and the record of adjudication or conviction reflects
the intent of the unlawful imprisonment was to abuse the minor
sexually.
"(16) Unlawful imprisonment in the second degree, as
provided by Section 13A-6-42, if the victim of the offense is
a minor, and the record of adjudication or conviction reflects
the intent of the unlawful imprisonment was to abuse the minor
sexually.
"(17) Kidnapping in the first degree, as provided by
subdivision (4) of subsection (a) of Section 13A-6-43, if the
intent of the abduction is to violate or abuse the victim
sexually.
"(18) Kidnapping of a minor, except by a parent,
guardian, or custodian, as provided by Section 13A-6-43 or
13A-6-44.
"(19) Incest, as provided by Section 13A-13-3.
"(20) Transmitting obscene material to a child by
computer, as provided by Section 13A-6-111.
"(21) School employee engaging in a sex act or
deviant sexual intercourse with a student, or having sexual
contact or soliciting a sex act or sexual contact with a
student as provided by Section Sections 13A-6-81 and 13A-6-82.
"(22) School employee having sexual contact with a
student, as provided by Section 13A-6-82 Foster parent
engaging in a sex act, having sexual contact, or soliciting a
sex act or sexual contact with a foster child as provided by
Section 13A-6-71.
"(23) Facilitating solicitation of unlawful sexual
conduct with a child, as provided by Section 13A-6-121.
"(24) Electronic solicitation of a child, as
provided by Section 13A-6-122.
"(25) Facilitating the on-line solicitation of a
child, as provided by Section 13A-6-123.
"(26) Traveling to meet a child for an unlawful sex
act, as provided by Section 13A-6-124.
"(27) Facilitating the travel of a child for an
unlawful sex act, as provided by Section 13A-6-125.
"(28) Human trafficking in the first degree, as
provided by Section 13A-6-152, provided that the offense
involves sexual servitude.
"(29) Human trafficking in the second degree, as
provided by Section 13A-6-153, provided that the offense
involves sexual servitude.
"(30) Custodial sexual misconduct, as provided by
Section 14-11-31.
"(31) Sexual extortion, as provided by Section
13A-6-241.
"(32) Directing a child to engage in a sex act, as
provided in Section 13A-6-243.
"(33) Any offense which is the same as or equivalent
to any offense set forth above as the same existed and was
defined under the laws of this state existing at the time of
such conviction, specifically including, but not limited to,
crime against nature, as provided by Section 13-1-110; rape,
as provided by Sections 13-1-130 and 13-1-131; carnal
knowledge of a woman or girl, as provided by Sections 13-1-132
through 13-1-135, or attempting to do so, as provided by
Section 13-1-136; indecent molestation of children, as defined
and provided by Section 13-1-113; indecent exposure, as
provided by Section 13-1-111; incest, as provided by Section
13-8-3; offenses relative to obscene prints and literature, as
provided by Sections 13-7-160 through 13-7-175, inclusive;
employing, harboring, procuring or using a girl over 10 and
under 18 years of age for the purpose of prostitution or
sexual intercourse, as provided by Section 13-7-1; seduction,
as defined and provided by Section 13-1-112; a male person
peeping into a room occupied by a female, as provided by
Section 13-6-6; assault with intent to ravish, as provided by
Section 13-1-46; and soliciting a child by computer, as
provided by Section 13A-6-110.
"(34) Any solicitation, attempt, or conspiracy to
commit any of the offenses listed in subdivisions (1) to (31)
(33), inclusive.
"(35) Any crime committed in Alabama or any other
state, the District of Columbia, any United States territory,
or a federal, military, Indian, or foreign country
jurisdiction which, if it had been committed in this state
under the current provisions of law, would constitute an
offense listed in subdivisions (1) to (32) (34), inclusive.
"(36) Any offense specified by Title I of the
federal Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act of 2006
(Pub. L. 109-248, the Sex Offender Registration and
Notification Act (SORNA)).
"(37) Any crime committed in another state, the
District of Columbia, any United States territory, or a
federal, military, Indian, or foreign country jurisdiction if
that jurisdiction also requires that anyone convicted of that
crime register as a sex offender in that jurisdiction.
"(38) Any offender determined in any jurisdiction to
be a sex offender shall be considered a sex offender in this
state.
"(39) The foregoing notwithstanding, any crime
committed in any jurisdiction which, irrespective of the
specific description or statutory elements thereof, is in any
way characterized or known as rape, carnal knowledge, sodomy,
sexual assault, sexual battery, criminal sexual conduct,
criminal sexual contact, sexual abuse, continuous sexual
abuse, sexual torture, solicitation of a child, enticing or
luring a child, child pornography, lewd and lascivious
conduct, taking indecent liberties with a child, molestation
of a child, criminal sexual misconduct, video voyeurism, or
there has been a finding of sexual motivation.
"(40) Any crime not listed in this section wherein
the underlying felony is an element of the offense and listed
in subdivisions (1) to (39), inclusive.
"(41) Any other offense not provided for in this
section wherein there is a finding of sexual motivation as
provided by Section 15-20A-6.
"§15-20A-6.
"(a)(1) The indictment, count in the indictment,
information, complaint or warrant charging the offense may
include a specification of sexual motivation or the
prosecuting attorney may file an allegation of sexual
motivation in any criminal case classified as a felony or
Class A misdemeanor if sufficient admissible evidence exists
that would justify a finding of sexual motivation by a
reasonable and objective finder of fact.
"(2) If a specification is included in the
indictment, count in the indictment, information, complaint,
or warrant charging the offense the specification shall be
stated at the end of the body of the indictment, count in the
indictment, information, complaint, or warrant and shall be in
substantially the following form: "SPECIFICATION or
SPECIFICATION TO THE FIRST COUNT. The Grand Jurors (or insert
appropriate name) further find and specify that the offender
committed the offense with a sexual motivation."
"(3) If the prosecuting attorney files an allegation
of sexual motivation, it shall be filed within a reasonable
time after indictment to give sufficient notice to the
defendant.
"(b) If the indictment, count of the indictment,
information, complaint, or warrant charging the offense
includes a specification of sexual motivation or if the
prosecuting attorney files an allegation of sexual motivation,
the state shall prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the
defendant committed the offense with a sexual motivation.
"(c) The court shall make a written finding of fact,
to be made part of the record upon conviction or adjudication
as a youthful offender, of whether or not a sexual motivation
was present at the time of the commission of the offense
unless the defendant has a trial by jury.
"(d) If a defendant has a trial by jury, the jury,
if it finds the defendant guilty, shall also find a special
verdict as to whether or not the defendant committed the crime
with a sexual motivation.
"(e) If there is a finding of sexual motivation, the
finding shall be made part of the record of conviction or
adjudication.
"(f) For purposes of this section, sexual motivation
means that one of the purposes for which the defendant
committed the crime was for the purpose of the sexual
gratification of the defendant.
"(g) This section shall not apply to sex offenses as
defined in subdivisions (1) to (38) (40), inclusive, of
Section 15-20A-5.
"§15-20A-44.
"(a) The Secretary of the Alabama State Law
Enforcement Agency shall promulgate rules establishing an
administrative hearing for persons who are only made subject
to this chapter pursuant to subdivision (33) (37) of Section
15-20A-5.
"(b) The Secretary of the Alabama State Law
Enforcement Agency shall promulgate rules setting forth a
listing of offenses from other jurisdictions that are to be
considered criminal sex offenses under subdivision (33) (37)
of Section 15-20A-5. Thereafter, any individual convicted of
any offense set forth in the listing shall immediately be
subject to this chapter and shall not be entitled to an
administrative hearing as provided in subsection (a).
"(c) The Secretary of the Alabama State Law
Enforcement Agency shall have the authority to promulgate any
rules as are necessary to implement and enforce this chapter."
Section 5. Although this bill would have as its
purpose or effect the requirement of a new or increased
expenditure of local funds, the bill is excluded from further
requirements and application under Amendment 621, now
appearing as Section 111.05 of the Official Recompilation of
the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as amended, because the
bill defines a new crime or amends the definition of an
existing crime.
Section 6. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.
President and Presiding Officer of the Senate
Speaker of the House of Representatives
SB26
Senate 15-FEB-18
I hereby certify that the within Act originated in and passed
the Senate.
Patrick Harris,
Secretary.
House of Representatives
Amended and passed 22-MAR-18
Senate concurred in House amendment 27-MAR-18
By: Senator Chambliss