SB83
188616-1
By Senator Dial
RFD: Health and Human Services
First Read: 09-JAN-18
188616-1:n:11/21/2017:KMS/tgw LSA2017-3209
SYNOPSIS:          This bill would create the Alabama Medical
Imaging and Radiation Therapy Patient Safety Act.
This bill would provide for the standardized
education and demonstration of competency by
medical imaging and radiation therapy professionals
under the jurisdiction of a licensing board.
This bill would establish the Alabama
Medical Imaging and Radiation Therapy Board to
provide for the regulation and licensure of limited
X-ray machine operators, magnetic resonance
technologists, nuclear medicine technologists,
radiation therapists, radiographers, and
radiologist assistants.
This bill would authorize the board to
discipline licensees and individuals practicing
without a license.
Amendment 621 of the Constitution of Alabama
of 1901, now appearing as Section 111.05 of the
Official Recompilation of the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, as amended, prohibits a general
law whose purpose or effect would be to require a
new or increased expenditure of local funds from
becoming effective with regard to a local
governmental entity without enactment by a 2/3 vote
unless: it comes within one of a number of
specified exceptions; it is approved by the
affected entity; or the Legislature appropriates
funds, or provides a local source of revenue, to
the entity for the purpose.
The purpose or effect of this bill would be
to require a new or increased expenditure of local
funds within the meaning of the amendment. However,
the bill does not require approval of a local
governmental entity or enactment by a 2/3 vote to
become effective because it comes within one of the
specified exceptions contained in the amendment.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
To create the Alabama Medical Imaging and Radiation
Therapy Patient Safety Act; to provide for the standardized
education and demonstration of competency by medical imaging
and radiation therapy professionals; to establish the Alabama
Medical Imaging and Radiation Therapy Board; to authorize the
board to provide for the regulation and licensure of limited
X-ray machine operators, magnetic resonance technologists,
nuclear medicine technologists, radiation therapists,
radiographers, and radiologist assistants; to authorize the
board to discipline medical imaging and radiation therapy
professionals who perform diagnostic imaging or radiation
therapy procedures for medical purposes; to provide civil and
criminal penalties for violations; and in connection therewith
would have as its purpose or effect the requirement of a new
or increased expenditure of local funds within the meaning of
Amendment 621 of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, now
appearing as Section 111.05 of the Official Recompilation of
the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as amended.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. This act shall be known and may be cited
as the Alabama Medical Imaging and Radiation Therapy Patient
Safety Act.
Section 2. For the purposes of this act, the
following terms shall have the following meanings:
(1) ACCREDITED EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM. An educational
program in medical imaging or radiation therapy that is
accredited by an accrediting agency recognized and approved by
the United States Department of Education or its successor.
(2) BOARD. The Alabama Medical Imaging and Radiation
Therapy Board created by this act.
(3) BONE DENSITOMETRY. The determination of bone
mass by means of the radiation absorption by a skeleton or
part of a skeleton.
(4) BONE DENSITOMETRY TECHNOLOGIST. A person who is
licensed under this act as a limited X-ray machine operator
with a permit to perform bone densitometry testing.
(5) BUSINESS ENTITY. A corporation, partnership,
association, limited liability company, or limited liability
partnership.
(6) CERTIFICATION ORGANIZATION. A national
certification organization that specializes in the
certification and registration of medical imaging or radiation
therapy technical personnel and is accredited by the National
Commission for Certifying Agencies, American National
Standards Institute, the International Organization for
Standardization, or other accreditation organization
recognized by the board.
(7) COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY. The process of producing
sectional and three-dimensional images using external ionizing
radiation for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes.
(8) COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY TECHNOLOGIST. A person who
is authorized by the board to perform computed tomography
procedures as a licensed nuclear medicine technologist,
licensed radiographer, or licensed radiation therapist.
(9) FLUOROSCOPY. The exposure of a patient to X-rays
in a fluoroscopy mode, including positioning the patient and
fluoroscopy equipment and the selection of exposure factors.
(10) HYBRID IMAGING. The combination of imaging
technologies that allows information from different modalities
to be presented as a single set of images.
(11) IONIZING RADIATION. Radiation that may consist
of alpha particles, beta particles, gamma rays, X-rays,
neutrons, high-speed electrons, high-speed protons, or other
particles capable of producing ions. Ionizing radiation does
not include nonionizing radiation, such as high frequency
sound waves, magnetic fields, microwaves, radio frequency
signals, or visible, infrared, or ultraviolet light.
(12) LICENSE. Authorization from the board to use
radioactive substances or equipment emitting ionizing
radiation, magnetic fields, or radio frequency signals for
medical imaging or radiation therapy procedures on humans for
diagnostic or therapeutic purposes in accordance with this act
and rules adopted by the board.
(13) LICENSED PRACTITIONER. A person licensed to
practice medicine, dentistry, podiatry, chiropractic, or
osteopathy in this state.
(14) LICENSEE. A person who is licensed under this
act to perform medical imaging or radiation therapy procedures
and operate medical imaging or radiation therapy equipment.
(15) LIMITED X-RAY MACHINE OPERATOR. A person who is
licensed under this act to perform, under the supervision of a
radiographer or licensed practitioner, diagnostic radiography
or bone densitometry procedures using equipment that emits
external ionizing radiation resulting in diagnostic
radiographic images of selected specific parts of human
anatomy or bone density measurements.
(16) MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING. The creation or
acquisition of images generated by using radio frequency
signals within a magnetic field for diagnostic or therapeutic
purposes.
(17) MAGNETIC RESONANCE TECHNOLOGIST. A person who
is licensed under this act to perform magnetic resonance
procedures using magnetic fields and radio frequency signals.
(18) MEDICAL IMAGING. A procedure, device, or
article that uses ionizing radiation, magnetic fields, or
radio frequency signals to produce images of the internal
structures of the human body for diagnostic or therapeutic
purposes.
(19) MOBILE IMAGING. Any arrangement in which
medical imaging services are transported to various sites.
Mobile imaging does not include movement within a hospital or
movement to a site where the equipment will be located
permanently.
(20) MODALITY. Technologies used in the diagnosis or
treatment of disease or other medical conditions in human
beings, including any of the following:
a. Magnetic resonance imaging and its
specializations.
b. Nuclear medicine and its specializations.
c. Radiation therapy and its specializations.
d. Radiography and its specializations.
(21) NUCLEAR MEDICINE TECHNOLOGIST. A person who is
licensed under this act to perform nuclear medicine and
molecular imaging procedures.
(22) NUCLEAR MEDICINE TECHNOLOGY. The performance,
under the supervision of an authorized user named on a
radioactive material license, of a variety of the following:
a. Nuclear medicine and molecular imaging procedures
using sealed and unsealed radiation sources, ionizing
radiation, preparation of radio pharmaceuticals, and use of
adjunctive medicines including contrast media and
pharmaceuticals associated with nuclear medicine procedures.
b. Therapeutic procedures using unsealed radioactive
sources.
(23) PUBLIC MEMBER. A person who is a resident of
this state but who is not a licensed practitioner, licensed to
perform medical imaging or radiation therapy procedures under
this act, or affiliated with any group or profession that
provides or regulates health care or in any way hinders the
public member from representing the interests of the public on
the board.
(24) RADIATION THERAPIST. A person who is licensed
under this act to perform procedures involving administration
of ionizing radiation to human beings for therapeutic
purposes.
(25) RADIATION THERAPY. The application, under the
supervision of a licensed practitioner or radiologist, of
x-radiation and the ionizing radiation emitted from particle
accelerators, cobalt 60 units, and sealed sources of
radioactive material to human beings for therapeutic purposes.
(26) RADIOGRAPHER. A person who is licensed under
this act to perform diagnostic radiographic procedures using
external ionizing radiation to produce bone density
measurements or radiographic, fluoroscopic, or digital images.
(27) RADIOGRAPHY. The process of obtaining an image
using external ionizing radiation for diagnostic or
therapeutic purposes.
(28) RADIOLOGIST. A physician licensed in this state
who is board-eligible for certification or certified by the
American Board of Radiology, the American Osteopathic Board of
Radiology, the British Royal College of Radiology, or the
Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada.
(29) RADIOLOGIST ASSISTANT. A licensed radiographer
who is additionally licensed under this act to perform a
variety of activities under the supervision of a radiologist
in the areas of patient care, patient management, and medical
imaging procedures.
(30) SPECIALIZATION. A medical specialty area or
type of equipment used within a medical imaging or radiation
therapy modality, which has a corresponding certification from
a certification organization recognized by the board.
Section 3. (a) The Alabama Medical Imaging and
Radiation Therapy Board is created. The members of the board
shall be appointed by the Governor. The initial members of the
board shall be appointed within 90 days following the
effective date of this act and shall serve initial terms as
provided in subsection (c). The members of the board shall
include all of the following:
(1) One licensed limited X-ray machine operator.
(2) One licensed magnetic resonance technologist.
(3) One licensed nuclear medicine technologist.
(4) One licensed practitioner who is a radiologist
and supervises medical imaging or radiation therapy
professionals.
(5) One licensed practitioner who is not a
radiologist and supervises medical imaging or radiation
therapy professionals.
(6) One licensed radiation therapist.
(7) One licensed radiographer.
(8) One licensed radiologist assistant.
(9) One public member.
(b) In addition to the requirements of subsection
(a), the qualifications for appointment to the board shall
include all of the following:
(1) Each board member shall be a resident of this
state.
(2) The public member shall be at least 21 years of
age.
(3) Except for the public member and the licensed
practitioners, each board member shall have at least two years
of experience performing medical imaging or radiation therapy
in the modality for which he or she is appointed.
(4) Except for the public member and the licensed
practitioners, the Alabama Society of Radiologic Technologists
shall nominate and submit a list of at least three names to
the Governor for each appointment.
(5) At least one of the board members appointed
shall be a full-time educator in an accredited educational
program in medical imaging or radiation therapy.
(c) Three of the initial members shall be appointed
for a term of one year, three shall be appointed for a term of
two years, and three shall be appointed for a term of three
years. Successor members shall serve terms of office of three
years. An appointment made to fill a vacancy on the board
shall possess the same qualifications as the original
appointment and shall serve for the unexpired term. No member
may serve more than two consecutive terms.
(d) The initial member appointed to the board who
performs medical imaging or radiation therapy procedures is
not required to hold a valid license issued by the board until
12 months after the first issuance of a license by the board.
(e) Members of the board shall be paid reasonable
travel, hotel, and other necessary expenses and may be
provided per diem compensation at the rate authorized by the
state while on board business.
(f) The board shall meet at least annually in
person, at a time and place of its choosing. The first meeting
of the board each year shall be for organization only, in
which the membership shall elect a chair and establish
responsibilities and rules of procedure. The board may meet
periodically by telephone or other electronic communication
method to conduct the business of the board as authorized by
the laws of this state.
(g) A member of the board who fails to attend three
meetings in an 18-month period shall forfeit his or her seat
on the board unless the chair, upon written request from the
member, finds that the member should be excused from a meeting
because of illness or death of a family member.
(h) A majority of the voting members of the board
shall constitute a quorum. No action may be taken by the board
except by affirmative vote of a majority of those present and
voting.
Section 4. The board may do all of the following:
(1) Administer this act.
(2) Issue interpretations of this act.
(3) Establish the scope of practice for each license
or permit issued by the board.
(4) Adopt rules pursuant to the Alabama
Administrative Procedure Act as necessary to implement this
act.
(5) Establish fees and fines as necessary to
administer this act.
(6) Establish requirements for the issuance and
renewal of a license or permit.
(7) Devise, contract, or adopt by rule an
examination for licensure to determine the fitness of an
applicant to perform medical imaging or radiation therapy.
(8) Fine a licensee found to be in violation of this
act and recover costs and fees incurred in the investigation
of a licensee.
(9) Obtain restraining orders and injunctions
prohibiting conduct in violation of this act or any rule
adopted by the board, conduct investigations, issue subpoenas,
conduct a hearing, appoint a hearing officer, examine
witnesses, and administer oaths concerning practices that are
alleged to violate this act or any rule adopted by the board.
(10) Maintain a written record of all proceedings
and make an annual report of all board actions available to
licensees and the public.
(11) Develop standards and adopt rules for the
improvement of the administration of medical imaging or
radiation therapy procedures in this state. The board, by
rule, may provide alternative licensing requirements for those
areas of the state which the board determines lack an adequate
number of qualified licensees to perform medical imaging or
radiation therapy procedures on humans for diagnostic or
therapeutic purposes.
(12) Establish continuing education requirements for
license renewal. The board may adopt the continuing education
and recertification or continuing competency requirements
established by a medical imaging or radiation therapy
certification organization for license renewal.
(13) Establish criteria and standards for
educational programs offered in this state in medical imaging
or radiation therapy. The board may adopt the accreditation
criteria and standards established by an appropriate
educational accreditation agency.
(14) Approve medical imaging or radiation therapy
educational programs that satisfy the criteria and standards
established by the board.
(15) Within 90 days after appointment of the initial
members of the board, notify all practitioners of medical
imaging and radiation therapy in the state, as identified by
the American Registry of Radiologic Technologists, the Nuclear
Medicine Technology Certification Board, or other appropriate
certification organizations, of the requirements of this act.
(16) Establish a budget.
(17) Employ an executive director and any officers
and employees as determined necessary, and determine their
duties and fix their compensation in accordance with state
law.
Section 5. There is established a separate special
trust fund in the State Treasury to be known as the Alabama
Medical Imaging and Radiation Therapy Board Fund. All receipts
collected by the board pursuant to this act shall be deposited
in this fund and used only to implement this act. Receipts
shall be disbursed only by warrant of the Comptroller upon the
State Treasurer, upon itemized vouchers approved by the chair.
No funds shall be withdrawn or expended except as budgeted and
allotted according to Sections 41-4-80 to 41-4-96, inclusive,
and Sections 41-19-1 to 41-19-12, inclusive, Code of Alabama
1975, and only in amounts as stipulated in the general
appropriations bill or other appropriation bills.
Section 6. (a) Commencing on January 1, 2020, except
as otherwise provided in this section, only a person licensed
under this act may perform or offer to perform medical imaging
or radiation therapy procedures on humans for diagnostic or
therapeutic purposes or hold himself or herself out as
licensed to perform medical imaging or radiation therapy
procedures.
(b) The board, by rule, shall establish the
education, certification, continuing education, licensure, and
scope of practice standards for a person performing limited
X-ray machine operation, magnetic resonance imaging, nuclear
medicine technology, radiation therapy, or radiography.
(c) The board, by rule, shall establish the
education, certification, continuing education, licensure, and
scope of practice standards for a person performing
radiologist assistant duties under the supervision of a
radiologist.
(d) No person or business entity shall knowingly
employ an unlicensed person, who is not otherwise exempt under
this act, to perform medical imaging or radiation therapy
procedures on humans for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes.
(e) Nothing in this act relating to medical imaging
or radiation therapy shall limit or enlarge the practice of a
licensed practitioner.
(f) This act does not apply to any of the following:
(1) A licensed practitioner performing medical
imaging or radiation therapy procedures.
(2) A licensed dental hygienist.
(3) A licensed dental assistant.
(4) A resident physician or a student enrolled in
and attending a school or college of medicine, chiropractic,
podiatry, medical imaging, or radiation therapy who performs
authorized medical imaging or radiation therapy procedures on
humans while under the supervision of a licensed practitioner
or under the direct supervision of a person holding a license
under this act in the supervised modality.
(5) A person who is employed by the United States
government to perform medical imaging or radiation therapy
procedures associated with that employment.
(6) A person performing medical imaging or radiation
therapy procedures on nonhuman subjects or cadavers.
Section 7. (a) The board shall establish scope of
practice standards for each medical imaging and radiation
therapy modality. The board, by rule, may adopt a scope of
practice from a certification organization or a professional
society or association.
(b) Commencing on October 1, 2024, a licensee who
performs computed tomography for diagnostic purposes shall be
certified in computed tomography by the American Registry of
Radiologic Technologists, the Nuclear Medicine Technologist
Certification Board, or other certification organization
recognized by the board.
(c) A licensed radiographer may perform fluoroscopy.
(d) A licensed limited X-ray machine operator may
perform tasks or procedures only within the scope of the
specific permit issued to him or her by the board for a
particular area of the human anatomy as provided in this act
and may not perform procedures involving the administration or
utilization of contrast media or perform computed tomography,
fluoroscopy, magnetic resonance imaging, mammography, mobile
imaging, nuclear medicine, or radiation therapy.
(e) A licensed nuclear medicine technologist may
perform computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging for
attenuation correction on hybrid imaging equipment.
(f) A licensed radiation therapist may perform
computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging for
treatment planning purposes.
(g)(1) A licensee may use radioactive substances or
equipment emitting ionizing radiation or magnetic resonance
and perform medical imaging and radiation therapy procedures
on humans for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes only under
all of the following conditions:
a. With a valid prescription of a person authorized
by this state to prescribe medical imaging or radiation
therapy procedures.
b. Under the supervision of a licensed practitioner.
c. Within the scope of the license as specified in
this act and pursuant to rules adopted by the board.
(2) A licensee may only perform medical imaging or
radiation therapy procedures in a modality for which they are
licensed.
(h) A licensee may not make a diagnostic
interpretation of an image, make a diagnosis, or prescribe a
medication or therapy.
Section 8. (a) A limited X-ray machine operator
license shall be limited in scope through the issuance of
permits to perform diagnostic X-rays on specific anatomical
areas of the human body.
(1) The following permits may be issued:
a. Chest radiography permit: Radiography of the
thorax, heart, and lungs.
b. Extremity radiography permit: Radiography of the
upper and lower extremities, including the pectoral girdle.
c. Spine radiography permit: Radiography of the
vertebral column.
d. Skull-sinus radiography permit: Radiography of
the skull and facial structures.
e. Podiatric permit: Radiography of the foot, ankle,
and lower leg below the knee.
f. Bone densitometry permit: A person who is
certified by the International Society for Clinical
Densitometry or the American Registry of Radiologic
Technologists in bone densitometry shall be granted a permit
to perform bone densitometry testing.
(2) To be licensed by the board as a limited X-ray
machine operator, an applicant shall submit the application
fee and satisfy all of the following requirements:
a. Be at least 18 years of age at the time of the
application.
b. Have a high school diploma or have passed an
approved equivalency test.
c. Have satisfactorily completed a course of study
in limited X-ray machine operation, or its equivalent, as
determined by the board. The curriculum for the course of
study shall be no less stringent than the standards approved
by the Joint Review Committee on Education in Radiologic
Technology, or other appropriate educational accreditation
agency recognized by the board.
d. Pass an examination approved by the board.
(b)(1) To be licensed by the board as a medical
imaging therapist or radiation therapist, an applicant shall
submit the application fee and satisfy all of the following
requirements:
a. Be at least 18 years of age at the time of
application.
b. Have a high school diploma or have passed an
approved equivalency test.
c. Have satisfactorily completed a course of study
in magnetic resonance, nuclear medicine, radiation therapy, or
radiography, respectively, or its equivalent, as determined by
the board. The curriculum for each course of study shall be no
less stringent than the standards approved by the Joint Review
Committee on Education in Radiologic Technology, Joint Review
Committee on Education in Nuclear Medicine Technology,
regional accrediting agencies, or other appropriate
educational accreditation agency recognized by certification
organizations. A person who is certified and registered by a
certification organization recognized by the board in a
medical imaging or radiation therapy modality or
specialization is deemed to have satisfied the requirement of
this paragraph for successful completion of a course of study
in the modality.
d. Pass an applicable modality or specialization
examination administered by a certification organization
recognized by the board. A person who is certified and
registered in a medical imaging or radiation therapy modality
is deemed to have satisfied the requirements of this paragraph
for successful completion of an examination.
(c)(1) To be eligible for licensure by the board as
a radiologist assistant, an applicant shall satisfy the
requirements of subsection (b) and all of the following
requirements:
a. Is licensed as a radiographer and is certified
and registered as a radiographer by the American Registry of
Radiologic Technologists.
b. Is certified and registered as a radiologist
assistant by the American Registry of Radiologic Technologists
or as a radiology practitioner assistant by the Certification
Board of Radiology Practitioner Assistants.
c. Submits to the board clinical protocols, signed
by the supervising radiologist, specifying procedures that are
performed by the radiologist assistant, levels of radiologist
supervision, and locations of practice designated by the
supervising radiologist. Updated protocols shall be submitted
biannually consistent with license renewal. The radiologist
assistant scope of practice shall be consistent with the most
recent version of the Radiologist Assistant Practice Standards
published by the American Society of Radiologic Technologists.
(2) A licensed radiologist assistant may not
interpret images, make diagnoses, or prescribe medications or
therapies.
(d) An applicant or licensee shall notify the board
in writing within 30 days after any of the following:
(1) A change in his or her name or address.
(2) Failure to maintain a required certification and
registration by a certification organization.
(3) Any legal or disciplinary action against the
applicant or licensee, other than minor traffic infractions,
or a proceeding brought for any act or conduct substantially
similar to any act or conduct that would constitute grounds
for refusal to issue, refusal to renew, suspension,
revocation, or other discipline of an applicant or licensee
under this act by any of the following:
a. A licensing jurisdiction, whether located within
the United States or not.
b. A health care institution.
c. A professional society or association.
d. A certification organization.
e. A government agency.
f. A law enforcement agency.
g. A court of law.
Section 9. A person who is engaged in the practice
of medical imaging and radiation therapy, other than a
radiologist assistant, who does not hold certification and
registration by a certification organization recognized by the
board on the effective date of this act, may continue to
practice in the medical imaging or radiation therapy modality
in which employed if he or she satisfies all of the following:
(1) Registers with the board on or before January 1,
2020.
(2) Does not change employment or the scope of his
or her practice.
(3) Completes all continuing education requirements
for his or her modality or specialization biannually as
prescribed by the board.
(4) Practices only under the supervision of a
licensed practitioner.
(5) Satisfies all licensure requirements imposed by
this act and rules adopted by the board and obtains a license
from the board on or before January 1, 2024.
Section 10. (a) To satisfy the examination
requirements of this act for licensure as a magnetic resonance
technologist, nuclear medicine technologist, radiation
therapist, radiographer, or radiologist assistant, the board
shall accept certification and registration by a certification
organization recognized by the board in the modality of the
applicant or licensee.
(b)(1) The board shall use a limited X-ray machine
operator examination administered by the American Registry of
Radiologic Technologists for persons applying for licensure as
a limited X-ray machine operator and permit in chest,
extremity, skull-sinus, podiatric, or spine radiography. The
board, by rule, shall determine the examination score that
constitutes successful completion of the examination.
(2) If an examination for limited X-ray machine
operator is administered by the board, the examination shall
be given at least twice each year at a time and place, and
under such supervision, as the board, by rule, may require.
(c) The board may accept certification and
registration from the American Chiropractic Registry of
Radiologic Technologists to satisfy the requirement of this
subsection for successful completion of an examination for a
person applying for licensure as a limited X-ray machine
operator and permit in spine radiography.
(d) The board may accept certification from the
American Society of Podiatric Medical Assistants to satisfy
the requirement of this subsection for successful completion
of an examination for a person applying for licensure as a
limited X-ray machine operator and permit in podiatric
radiography.
(e) The board shall accept magnetic resonance
certification and registration from the American Registry of
Radiologic Technologists or other certification organization
recognized by the board to satisfy the examination requirement
of this section.
(f) The board shall accept nuclear medicine
certification and registration from the American Registry of
Radiologic Technologists, the Nuclear Medicine Technologist
Certification Board, or other certification organization
recognized by the board to satisfy the examination requirement
of this section.
(g) The board shall accept radiation therapy
certification and registration from the American Registry of
Radiologic Technologists or other certification organization
recognized by the board to satisfy the examination requirement
of this section.
(h) The board shall accept radiography certification
and registration from the American Registry of Radiologic
Technologists or other certification organization recognized
by the board to satisfy the examination requirements of this
section.
Section 11. (a) The board shall issue a license to
an applicant who satisfies the requirements for licensure
specified in this act and by rules adopted by the board,
verified by oath or affirmation, and upon payment of any fees
required by rules adopted by the board. The board may issue a
license with authorization to perform more than one medical
imaging or radiation therapy modality if the applicant is
qualified in each modality.
(b) The board may issue a temporary license to any
applicant whose license or license renewal is pending or who
the board determines will provide medical imaging or radiation
therapy services to a medically underserved area of the state.
(1) A temporary license may only be issued if the
board determines that the issuance does not violate the
purpose of this act or endanger the public health and safety.
(2) A temporary license in a modality may be issued
to an applicant who is preparing for a certification
examination in the modality.
(3) A temporary license shall expire when the
applicant is issued a license, denied a license, or 90
calendar days after issuance, whichever occurs first. The
board may extend a temporary license for an additional 90 days
if the applicant fails to successfully complete the
certification examination. A temporary license may only be
extended one time.
(c) Except for a limited X-ray machine operator
licensee, a licensee may apply to the board for a temporary
license in an additional medical imaging or radiation therapy
modality for the purpose of completing clinical experience
requirements for an applicable training pathway established by
a certification organization recognized by the board. A
temporary license issued pursuant to this subsection shall
expire three years after issuance.
(d) A licensee shall display his or her official
license, or a verified copy of the official license, in each
place of regular employment.
Section 12. (a) The board, by rule, shall establish
standards for medical imaging and radiation therapy
educational programs. The standards shall be no less stringent
than the standards approved by the Joint Review Committee on
Education in Radiologic Technology, the Joint Review Committee
on Education in Nuclear Medicine Technology, regional
accrediting agencies, or other appropriate educational
accreditation agencies recognized by certification
organizations.
(b) A program in magnetic resonance technology,
nuclear medicine technology, radiation therapy, or radiography
that is approved by the board shall be offered by a medical
facility or educational institution. The program shall be
affiliated with one or more hospitals or clinics approved by
the board to provide the requisite clinical education.
(c) The board, by rule, may establish a course of
study for a limited X-ray machine operator.
Section 13. (a) Unless otherwise provided, a license
issued under this act shall be renewed every two years. The
board may adjust the expiration date of a license by up to six
months to allow coordination with certification and
registration expiration dates. The license shall be renewed
upon the payment of a renewal fee, established by rule of the
board, and verification by oath or affirmation of the licensee
that he or she is not in violation of this act or any rule
adopted by the board.
(b) The board shall notify a licensee at least 60
days before the expiration of his or her license.
(c) A licensee is responsible for renewing a license
before the expiration date. A license that is not renewed
before the expiration date shall automatically lapse.
(d) The board, by rule, may provide for the late
renewal of an automatically lapsed license upon the payment of
a reinstatement fee. A license that has been expired for more
than two years may not be reinstated.
(e) Where applicable, a licensee shall maintain
certification and registration by the applicable certification
organization recognized by the board throughout the licensure
period and may not be required to duplicate continuing
education hours submitted to the certification organization.
(f) The board may require a licensee to submit
evidence of certification and registration by the applicable
certification organization. The certification and registration
shall be deemed equivalent to the continuing education
requirements established by this act or by rule of the board.
(g) As a condition of license renewal, a fluoroscopy
operator or limited X-ray machine operator licensee shall
complete continuing education requirements established by rule
of the board.
Section 14. Upon application and payment of proper
fees, the board may issue a license to a person who has been
licensed, registered, or certified to perform medical imaging
or radiation therapy procedures in another jurisdiction if the
standards of that jurisdiction are substantially equivalent to
those required by this act and rules of the board.
Section 15. The board, by rule, shall establish and
collect all fees authorized by this act and necessary for the
administration of this act. All fees are nonrefundable.
Section 16. (a) The board may deny, suspend, revoke,
or refuse to renew a license or impose probationary conditions
on a license if the licensee or applicant for a license,
renewal of a license, or reinstatement of a license has
engaged in any of the following conduct:
(1) Obtaining a license by means of fraud,
misrepresentation, or concealment of material facts.
(2) Engaging in unprofessional conduct as defined by
rule of the board.
(3) Having been convicted of or pleaded guilty or
nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude or any
crime that indicates that the licensee or applicant is unfit
or incompetent to perform medical imaging or radiation therapy
procedures or that the licensee or applicant has deceived or
defrauded the public.
(4) Engaging in any act or practice in violation of
this act or any rule adopted by the board, or aiding,
abetting, or assisting any person in such a violation.
(5) Committing an act of malpractice, gross
negligence, or incompetence in performing medical imaging or
radiation therapy procedures.
(6) Practicing as a person licensed to perform
medical imaging or radiation therapy procedures without a
license.
(7) Engaging in conduct that could result in harm or
injury to the public.
(8) Having a license issued under this act revoked
or suspended or other disciplinary action taken, whether in
this state or another jurisdiction.
(9) Having been determined to be unfit or
incompetent to perform medical imaging or radiation therapy
procedures due to deliberate or negligent acts or omissions,
regardless of whether actual injury to a patient is
established.
(b) An application for reinstatement of a revoked
license may not be made to the board until two years after the
date of revocation.
Section 17. (a) The board may apply to any
appropriate court for an order enjoining violations of this
act or rule adopted by the board, and upon a showing by the
board that a person has violated or is about to violate this
act or any rule adopted by the board, the court may grant an
injunction, restraining order, or take other appropriate
action.
(b) Any person who is found guilty of violating this
act or any rule adopted by the board shall be guilty of a
Class C misdemeanor. Each violation shall constitute a
distinct and separate offense.
Section 18. (a) The board may assess a civil penalty
not in excess of the amount allowable under state law for the
violation of this act or any rule adopted by the board. The
proceeds of any civil penalty assessed under this section
shall be paid into the Alabama Medical Imaging and Radiation
Therapy Board Fund established by this act.
(b) Before imposing and assessing a civil penalty,
the board shall consider the following factors:
(1) The nature, gravity, and persistence of the
violation.
(2) The appropriateness of the imposition of a civil
penalty when considered alone or in combination with other
punishment.
(3) Whether the violation was willful and malicious.
(4) Any other factor that would tend to mitigate or
aggravate the violation if found to exist.
(c) The board, by rule, shall establish a schedule
of civil penalties for violation of this act and any rule
adopted by the board.
(d) The board may assess the costs of disciplinary
actions against a person found to be in violation of this act
or any rule adopted by the board.
Section 19. The board shall be subject to the
Alabama Sunset Law, Chapter 20, Title 41, Code of Alabama
1975, as an enumerated agency as provided in Section 41-20-3,
Code of Alabama 1975, and shall have a termination date of
October 1, 2024, and every four years thereafter, unless
continued pursuant to the Alabama Sunset Law.
Section 20. Although this bill would have as its
purpose or effect the requirement of a new or increased
expenditure of local funds, the bill is excluded from further
requirements and application under Amendment 621, now
appearing as Section 111.05 of the Official Recompilation of
the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as amended, because the
bill defines a new crime or amends the definition of an
existing crime.
Section 21. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.