HB412
191505-1
By Representatives Mooney, Hanes, Whorton (R), Williams (JW),
Moore (B), Butler, Farley, Nordgren, Williams (P), Weaver
and Fridy
RFD: State Government
First Read: 13-FEB-18
191505-1:n:02/12/2018:JET/tj LSA2018-797
SYNOPSIS:           This bill would require the Department of
Human Resources to require individuals to cooperate
with the Child Support Enforcement Division as a
condition of eligibility for Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP) benefits.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
Relating to public assistance; to amend Section
38-10-5, Code of Alabama 1975, relating to the assignment of
certain child support enforcement payments, to require
individuals to cooperate with the Child Support Enforcement
Division as a condition of eligibility for Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) benefits.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Section 38-10-5, Code of Alabama 1975, is
amended to read as follows:
"ยง38-10-5.
"(a) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
article, as a condition of eligibility for aid, each recipient
of aid to families with dependent children shall have assigned
to the department by operation of law any rights to support
from any other person which such the recipient may have in his
or her own behalf or in behalf of any other family member for
whom the recipient is receiving aid, which accrued at the time
such the assignment is executed, which continue to accrue
until said the recipient family ceases to receive aid and
which may have effect as provided by the Social Security Act
and amendments thereto. Such assignment to the department of
the rights to any support owed up to the amount of aid paid by
the department to the recipient shall conform with the
requirements of the Social Security Act and amendments
thereto. Such assignment shall make the department assignee of
and to the right of such child or recipient or the person
having custody to collect and receive all support payments and
to initiate any support action existing now or in the future
under the laws of Alabama and for the purpose of conforming
and complying with the provisions of the Social Security Act
and amendments thereto. An assignment made in accordance with
the provisions of this article by a parent or other person of
any age shall be binding as if such parent or other person
were over the age of 19 years.
"(b) Notwithstanding subsection (a), the Department
of Human Resources shall require individuals to cooperate with
the Child Support Enforcement Division as a condition of
eligibility for Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
(SNAP) benefits, pursuant to 7 C.F.R. ยง 273.11(o) and 7 C.F.R.
273.11(p)."
Section 2. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.