SB219
190179-1
By Senator Shelnutt
RFD: County and Municipal Government
First Read: 25-JAN-18
190179-1:n:01/23/2018:FC/tj LSA2018-344
SYNOPSIS:           This bill would require the Department of
Revenue to develop and make available a single
point of filing and payment system for county and
municipal motor fuel taxes. This bill would also
require the standardization of county and municipal
motor fuel taxes. The bill would also establish a
Local Motor Fuel Tax Advisory Committee to advise
the Department of Revenue on procedures and the
operation of the system.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
Relating to motor fuel taxes; to require the
Department of Revenue to develop and make available a system
which allows any taxpayer required to file and remit a county
or municipal motor fuel tax to file and remit the motor fuel
tax returns and payments through an electronic single point of
filing and payment system; to provide for the use of the local
electronic single point of filing and payment system by a
taxpayer or local taxing jurisdiction at no charge; to provide
for standardization among all county and municipal motor fuel
tax levies regarding point of collection, measure of taxation,
due dates, penalties, and exemptions, but not the rate of tax;
to allow the Department of Revenue to adopt rules to implement
this act; and to create a Local Motor Fuel Tax Advisory
Committee to provide advice to the Commissioner of Revenue and
to provide for its members, powers, and duties.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. For the purposes of this act, the
following words have the following meanings:
(1) DEPARTMENT. The Department of Revenue.
(2) DIESEL FUEL. Any liquid that is advertised,
offered for sale, or sold for use as or used as a motor fuel
in a diesel-powered engine. Diesel fuel includes #1 and #2
fuel oils, kerosene, special fuels, and blended fuels which
contain diesel fuel, but does not include gasoline or aviation
fuel.
(3) DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who engages in the
selling of motor fuel in this state by wholesale domestic
trade.
(4) DYED DIESEL FUEL. Diesel fuel that meets the
dyeing and marking requirements of Section 4082, Title 26 of
the United States Code.
(5) GASOLINE. Any product commonly or commercially
known as gasoline, or any substitute therefor, regardless of
classification, that is advertised, offered for sale, or sold
for use as or used as fuel in an internal combustion engine,
including gasohol and blended fuel which contains gasoline.
Gasoline does not include aviation gasoline sold for use in an
aircraft motor.
(6) IMPORTER. A person who imports motor fuel into a
county or municipality.
(7) KEROSENE. All grades of kerosene, including, but
not limited to, the two grades of kerosene, No. 1-K and No.
2-K, commonly known as K-1 kerosene and K-2 kerosene,
respectively, described in the American Society for Testing
Materials Standard D-3699, in effect on January 1, 1999, and
kerosene-type jet fuel described in the American Society for
Testing Materials Standard D-1655 and military specifications
MIL-t-5624r and MIL-t-83133d (grades jp-5 and jp8), and any
grade described as kerosene or kerosene-type jet fuel by the
Internal Revenue Code and administrative guidance adopted
thereunder.
(8) MOTOR FUEL. Gasoline and diesel fuel, but does
not include aviation fuel.
(9) PERSON. Any individual, firm, cooperative,
association, corporation, limited liability corporation,
trust, business trust, syndicate, partnership, limited
liability partnership, joint venture, receiver, trustee in
bankruptcy, club, society, or other group or combination
acting as a unit.
(10) REFINERY. A facility, other than a natural gas
processing or fractionation plant, used to produce taxable
motor fuel from crude oil, unfinished oils, natural gas
liquids, or other hydrocarbons and from which taxable motor
fuel may be removed by pipeline, by vessel, or at a rack.
(11) RETAIL DEALER. A person other than a wholesale
distributor that engages in the business of selling or
distributing motor fuel to the end user within this state.
(12) SPECIAL FUEL. Any liquid, other than gasoline,
used or suitable for use as motor fuel in a diesel-powered
engine or motor to propel any form of vehicle, machine, or
mechanical contrivance, and includes products commonly known
as biodiesel fuel. Special fuel does not include any petroleum
product or chemical compound such as alcohol, industrial
solvent, or lubricant, unless blended in or sold for use as
motor fuel in a diesel powered engine.
(13) TAX. Any amount of tax on motor fuel, including
applicable penalty and interest, levied or assessed against a
taxpayer and which the department or any county, municipality,
or their designees are required or authorized to administer
under the laws of this state.
(14) TAXPAYER. Any person subject to or liable for
any local tax; any person required to file a return with
respect to, or to pay, or withhold and remit any local tax or
to report any information or value to the department, a
county, municipality, or its designee; or any person required
to obtain or holding any interest in any license, permit, or
certificate of title issued by the department, a county,
municipality, or its designee, or any person that may be
affected by any act or refusal to act by the department, a
county, municipality, or its designee, or to keep any records
required by this chapter.
Section 2. (a) Not later than November 1 following
the effective date of this section, the Department of Revenue
shall develop and make available a system which allows any
taxpayer required to file and remit a county or municipal
motor fuel tax the capability to file and remit motor fuel tax
returns and payments through an electronic single point of
filing and payment system. The system shall be available for
use by any taxpayer for tax periods after September 30
following the effective date of this section. The system shall
allow for motor fuel tax return filing and tax remittance only
and shall not provide for the administration or enforcement of
local motor fuel taxes unless otherwise provided for by law.
This subsection applies to any local motor fuel tax whether
called a tax, license fee, privilege license tax, or
otherwise.
(b) There shall be no charge to a local taxing
jurisdiction for use of the system by a taxpayer or a local
taxing jurisdiction or its designee.
(c) The system developed and implemented pursuant to
subsection (a) shall allow a taxpayer to file an electronic
tax return for each local taxing jurisdiction where the
taxpayer is required to file and remit a motor fuel tax. The
returns to be filed using the single point filing system shall
be filed electronically in a manner as prescribed by the
department. All information included in the electronic tax
return shall be electronically available to each appropriate
local taxing jurisdiction without delay. The department shall
consult with the Local Motor Fuel Tax Advisory Committee
established in Section 6 regarding development and
implementation of the system.
(d) Every local taxing jurisdiction levying or
administering a motor fuel tax shall submit to the department
a list of the motor fuel taxes levied or administered by that
local taxing jurisdiction including current rates by January
15 following the effective date of this section. Every local
taxing jurisdiction shall submit to the department written
notification of any new or amended motor fuel tax at least 90
days prior to the effective date of the tax or amendment.
Failure to notify the department of a change to the levy shall
suspend the change to the tax, and the department shall not be
required to program new motor fuel taxes or tax rates in the
system until the notice is provided as required in this
section. The department shall then have 90 days from the
receipt date of the written notification to update the system.
Section 3. (a)(1) All local taxing jurisdictions in
the state shall require use of the single point filing and
payment system by any taxpayer required to file a local motor
fuel tax return or remit the tax payments. Any taxpayer using
the system for filing an electronic tax return for a local
taxing jurisdiction shall be required to simultaneously remit
payment through the system or through another electronic
method of payment accepted by the local taxing jurisdiction or
its designee for which payment is being made. The taxpayer
shall be required to report all motor fuel sold or delivered
by store location which shall include the name of the store,
the physical address of the store, the sales tax number for
each store, the number of gallons of excise taxable motor fuel
by product type sold by the distributor to the store, the
local excise tax paid, and any other information required by
the department.
(2) Effective October 1 following the effective date
of this section, each local taxing jurisdiction levying a
motor fuel tax shall be prohibited from accepting any local
motor fuel tax return not filed through the single point
filing system. Any local motor fuel tax return or payment made
to a local taxing jurisdiction that does not conform to this
act shall be invalid.
(b) It is the intent of this act that the tax be
collected and paid by the distributor. The distributor shall
collect and pay the tax on the basis of the number of gallons
of motor fuel distributed. If the tax levied by the locality
has been collected and paid by a distributor, that payment
shall be sufficient, the intent being that the tax shall be
paid once. If the tax has not been collected by the
distributor, the retail dealer shall be liable for the tax if
motor fuel is dropped at the retail station in the county or
municipality. A retail dealer paying the tax as provided in
this section shall pay the tax on the basis of gallons of
motor fuel purchased. Storage does not include motor fuel
located at the retail level.
(c) Any person importing motor fuel into the county
or municipality shall collect and pay the county or
municipality taxes on the basis of gallons of motor fuel
dropped within the locality unless the taxes are otherwise
collected or assumed by a distributor.
(d) If any taxpayer fails to timely file a return or
fails to timely pay the tax imposed by the county or
municipality, the tax shall be deemed delinquent and there
shall be added to the amount of the tax a penalty of 25
percent of the amount of tax due.
(e) Any taxpayer requesting a refund from a
non-state administered locality for local motor fuel taxes or
any penalties imposed by this act shall make the refund
directly through the non-state administered locality or its
designee.
(f) Not later than February 1 following the
effective date of this section, each local taxing jurisdiction
shall provide the department with necessary information to
allow all motor fuel tax payments to be remitted directly to
the bank account or other account designated by the local
taxing jurisdiction. Each non-state administered local taxing
jurisdiction shall set up its accounts to allow dishonored
payments to be reversed. All tax payments made through the
system for non-state administered local taxing jurisdictions
shall be remitted directly from the taxpayer to the designated
bank account or other account of the local taxing jurisdiction
with the system serving as a conduit only.
(g) The local motor fuel tax return and payment
submitted through this system shall be due on or before the
20th day of the month next succeeding the month in which the
tax accrues.
Section 4. For the tax periods after September 30
following the effective date of this section, the following
shall be exempt from any excise tax subject to this act:
(1) Motor fuel when used in governmental functions
by the federal government or any agency of the federal
government, the state or any agency of the state, county
governing agencies, municipalities, and boards of education.
(2) Dyed diesel fuel as defined in Section
40-17-322, Code of Alabama 1975, except dyed diesel fuel used
to operate a highway vehicle by a nonexempt person or entity.
(3) The sale of motor fuel in interstate commerce.
(4) Aviation fuel as defined in Section 40-17-322,
Code of Alabama 1975.
(5) A refinery that uses motor fuel in the refining
process.
(6) A person who holds a federal permit to blend
motor fuels under federal law who pays the federal excise tax
on motor fuels directly to the federal government when the
person uses gasoline in the state in the blending process.
Section 5. (a)(1) Effective October 1 following the
effective date of this section, any existing county motor fuel
tax levy that is inconsistent with this act regarding point of
collection, measure of taxation, due dates, penalties, and
exemptions, but not the rate of tax, shall be superseded and
the levy shall be collected and reported in accordance with
this act.
(2) Any new county motor fuel tax levy enacted after
October 1 following the effective date of this section shall
conform to this act. Any new county motor fuel tax levy that
is inconsistent with this act regarding point of collection,
measure of taxation, due dates, penalties, and exemptions, but
not the rate of tax, shall be superseded and the levy shall be
collected and reported in accordance with the terms of this
act.
(b)(1) Effective October 1 following the effective
date of this section, all municipal motor fuel tax levies
shall conform to this act regarding point of collection,
measure of taxation, due dates, penalties, and exemptions, but
not rate of tax. Any municipal motor fuel tax levy which does
not conform to this act regarding point of collection, measure
of taxation, due dates, penalties, and exemptions, but not
rate of tax, shall be invalid. Notice of the municipal motor
fuel tax ordinance shall be provided to the department no
later than February 1 following the effective date of this
section.
(2) Any new municipal motor fuel tax levy enacted
after October 1 following the effective date of this section
shall conform to this act. Notice of the municipal motor fuel
tax ordinance shall be provided to the department at least 90
days prior to the effective date of the new municipal motor
fuel tax levy. Any municipal motor fuel tax levy that does not
conform to this act regarding point of collection, measure of
taxation, due dates, penalties, and exemptions, but not rate
of tax, shall be invalid.
(3) Each local taxing jurisdiction shall notify all
licensed distributors of motor fuels within its jurisdiction
of its intent to adopt a new or amended motor fuel tax at
least 30 days prior to the adoption of the new or amended
motor fuel tax. Notification shall be in writing and delivered
by United States mail. Failure of the local taxing
jurisdiction to notify licensed distributors as required by
this subdivision shall nullify the adoption of the new or
amended motor fuel tax.
Section 6. (a)(1) To ensure that industry and local
taxing jurisdictions have meaningful input into the
development and operation of the tax filing, payment, and
collection of the system provided in this act, the Local Motor
Fuel Tax Advisory Committee is established to review the
design and operation of the system and to make recommendations
regarding system requirements and functionality to the
Commissioner of Revenue.
(2) The committee shall consist of the following
persons:
a. Three representatives of county government
appointed by the Association of County Commissions of Alabama.
b. Three representatives of municipal government
appointed by the Alabama League of Municipalities.
c. Three representatives of the retail or
distributor community appointed by the Petroleum and
Convenience Marketers of Alabama.
d. One representative of a county or municipality
which levies a motor fuel tax appointed by the Speaker of the
House of Representatives who shall be a nonvoting member.
e. One representative of the business community
appointed by the President Pro Tempore of the Senate who shall
be a nonvoting member.
f. One representative of the Department of Revenue
appointed by the Commissioner of Revenue.
(3) The committee members shall receive no
compensation or reimbursement of expenses from the state for
serving on the committee.
(b) The committee shall meet with the commissioner
or his or her representative and with other employees of the
department as the commissioner deems appropriate. The initial
meeting shall be at a time and place to be determined by the
commissioner and shall be held not later than September 30
following the effective date of this section. At the initial
meeting, the committee shall organize itself, elect a chair of
the committee, and determine the timing and frequency of
subsequent meetings.
(c) The role of the committee shall be limited to
providing input and recommendations on the development and
functionality of the system related to the filing of motor
fuel tax returns and remittance of payments using the system.
The committee may not review the department's administration
of state taxes, state-administered local taxes, or any other
department matter beyond the system.
Section 7. The Commissioner of the Department of
Revenue may adopt rules necessary to effectuate the reporting,
collection, administration, and enforcement of this act.
Section 8. Section 6 of this act shall become
effective July 1, 2018, following its passage and approval by
the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law. The remaining
sections of this act shall become effective January 1, 2020,
following its passage and approval by the Governor or its
otherwise becoming law.