SB15
188175-1
By Senator Glover (Constitutional Amendment)
RFD: Constitution, Ethics and Elections
First Read: 09-JAN-18
PFD: 09/25/2017
188175-1:n:09/20/2017:JLB/th LRS2017-2936
SYNOPSIS:           Under the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, a
vacancy in either the Alabama House of
Representatives or Senate is filled by a special
election called by the Governor.
This bill would propose an amendment to the
Constitution to provide a vacancy in either the
House of Representatives or the Senate that occurs
with less than two years remaining in the term
would be filled by a person qualified to hold the
office and appointed by the Governor. The amendment
also would provide that a person appointed to the
vacancy is not eligible to run for the office in
the election for the next full term for the office.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
Proposing an amendment to the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901; to provide that a vacancy in either house of
the Legislature occurring with less than two years remaining
in the term would be filled by appointment by the Governor
rather than by a special election and to prohibit a person
appointed to fill the vacancy from running for election to the
office for the next full term of office.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. The following amendment to the
Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as amended, is proposed and
shall become valid as a part thereof when approved by a
majority of the qualified electors voting thereon and in
accordance with Sections 284, 285, and 287 of the Constitution
of Alabama of 1901, as amended:
PROPOSED AMENDMENT
Part 1. Section 46 of the Constitution of Alabama of
1901, and Amendment 97 to the Constitution of Alabama of 1901,
both now appearing as Section 46 of the Official Recompilation
of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, are repealed.
Part 2. Section 46 is added to the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, to read as follows:
Section 46.
(a) Senators and representatives shall be elected by
the qualified electors on the first Tuesday after the first
Monday in November unless the Legislature shall change the
time of holding elections and in every fourth year thereafter.
The terms of office of the senators and representatives shall
commence on the day after the general election at which they
are elected, and expire on the day after the general election
held in the fourth year after their election, except as
otherwise provided in this Constitution. At the general
election in the year nineteen hundred and two all the
representatives, together with the senators for the even
numbered districts and for the thirty-fifth district, shall be
elected. The terms of those senators who represent the odd
numbered districts under the law in force prior to the
ratification of this Constitution, are hereby extended until
the day after the general election in the year nineteen
hundred and six; and until the expiration of his or her term
as hereinbefore extended, each such senator shall represent
the district established by this Constitution, bearing the
number corresponding with that for which he or she was
elected. In the year nineteen hundred and six, and in every
fourth year thereafter, all the senators and representatives
shall be elected.
(b) When a vacancy occurs in either house of the
Legislature, the Governor shall issue a writ of election to
fill the vacancy for the remainder of the term. However, if
the Secretary of State determines that a legally qualified
candidate for election to the vacancy is unopposed when the
last date for filing certificates of nomination has passed,
the election shall not be held. The Secretary of State shall
issue a certificate of election to the candidate, the same as
if an election had been held, and the certificate shall be
accepted by the house in which the vacancy occurred as
evidence of the unopposed candidate's right to fill the
position created by the vacancy. In the event an election is
held, all the costs and expenses incurred thereby shall be
paid out of any funds in the State Treasury not otherwise
appropriated.
(c) When a vacancy occurs in either house of the
Legislature with less than two years remaining in the term,
the Governor shall appoint a person qualified to hold the
office for the remainder of the term. A person so appointed
may not run for election to the office at the election for the
next full term of office for the office.
Section 2. An election upon the proposed amendment
shall be held in accordance with Sections 284 and 285 of the
Constitution of Alabama of 1901, now appearing as Sections 284
and 285 of the Official Recompilation of the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, as amended, and the election laws of this
state.
Section 3. The appropriate election official shall
assign a ballot number for the proposed constitutional
amendment on the election ballot and shall set forth the
following description of the substance or subject matter of
the proposed constitutional amendment:
"Proposing an amendment to the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, to provide that a vacancy in either house of
the Legislature occurring with less than two years remaining
in the term would be filled by appointment by the Governor
rather than by a special election and to prohibit a person
appointed to fill the vacancy from running for election to the
office for the next full term of office.
"Proposed by Act ________."
This description shall be followed by the following
language:
"Yes ( )   No ( )."