HB419
191310-3
By Representative South
RFD: Insurance
First Read: 15-FEB-18
ENROLLED, An Act,
Relating to insurance; to clarify that self-service
storage facilities are not engaged in the transaction of
insurance business under existing law; to amend Section
27-7-1, Code of Alabama 1975, to include self-service storage
facility insurance within the definition of limited lines
insurance; and to add Section 27-7-5.3 to the Code of Alabama
1975, to provide for a limited license as an insurance agent
to self-service storage facilities.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Section 27-7-1 of the Code of Alabama
1975, is amended to read as follows:
"ยง27-7-1.
"For the purposes of this chapter, the following
terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by
this section:
"(1) BUSINESS ENTITY. A corporation, association,
partnership, limited liability company, limited liability
partnership, or other legal entity.
"(2) COMMISSIONER. The Alabama Commissioner of
Insurance.
"(3) HOME STATE. The District of Columbia and any
state or territory of the United States in which an insurance
producer maintains his or her principal place of residence or
principal place of business and is licensed to act as an
insurance producer.
"(4) INSURANCE. As defined in Section 27-1-2.
"(5) INSURANCE PRODUCER or PRODUCER. A person
required to be licensed under the laws of this state to sell,
solicit, or negotiate insurance.
"(6) INSURER. As defined in Section 27-1-2. For the
purposes of this chapter, insurer shall also mean an insurance
company licensed pursuant to Chapter 3, commencing with
Section 27-3-1 of this title; a health care service plan
licensed pursuant to Article 6, commencing with Section
10A-20-6.01 of Chapter 20 of Title 10A; a dental service
corporation licensed pursuant to Article 12, commencing with
Section 22-21-360 of Chapter 21 of Title 22; a health
maintenance organization licensed pursuant to Chapter 21A,
commencing with Section 27-21A-1 of this title; a mutual aid
association licensed pursuant to Chapter 30, commencing with
Section 27-30-1 of this title; a fraternal benefit society
licensed pursuant to Chapter 34, commencing with Section
27-34-1 of this title; an automobile club or association
licensed pursuant to Chapter 39, commencing with Section
27-39-1 of this title; and a legal service insurance
corporation licensed pursuant to Chapter 43, commencing with
Section 27-43-1 of this title.
"(7) LICENSE. A document issued by the commissioner
authorizing a person to act as an insurance producer for the
lines of authority specified in the document. The license
itself does not create any authority, actual, apparent, or
inherent, in the holder to represent or commit an insurance
carrier.
"(8) LICENSEE. A producer or service representative
licensed in accordance with this chapter; a reinsurance
intermediary licensed in accordance with Chapter 5A; a
managing general agent licensed in accordance with Chapter 6A;
and a surplus line broker licensed in accordance with Chapter
10.
"(9) LICENSEE PENALTIES. For a producer or service
representative licensed in accordance with this chapter, the
penalties set forth in Section 27-7-19; for a reinsurance
intermediary licensed in accordance with Chapter 5A, the
penalties set forth in Section 27-5A-11; for a managing
general agent licensed in accordance with Chapter 6A, the
penalties set forth in Section 27-6A-7; and for a surplus line
broker licensed in accordance with Chapter 10, the penalties
set forth in Section 27-10-32.
"(10) LIFE LINES OF AUTHORITY. Any one or more of
the following lines as defined in Section 27-7-14.1: Life;
accident and health or sickness, also known as disability; and
variable life and variable annuity products.
"(11) LIMITED LINE CREDIT INSURANCE. Credit life,
credit disability, credit property, credit unemployment,
creditor-placed, also known as forced-placed, nonfiling,
involuntary unemployment, mortgage life, mortgage guaranty,
mortgage disability, guaranteed automobile protection (GAP),
family and medical leave insurance, and any other form of
insurance offered in connection with an extension of credit
that is limited to partially or wholly extinguishing that
credit obligation that the commissioner determines should be
designated a form of limited line credit insurance.
"(12) LIMITED LINE CREDIT INSURANCE PRODUCER. A
person who sells, solicits, or negotiates one or more forms of
limited line credit insurance coverage to individuals through
a master, corporate, group, or individual policy.
"(13) LIMITED LINES INSURANCE. Limited line credit
insurance, insurance on rental vehicles as defined in Section
27-7-5.1, travel insurance as defined in Section 27-7-5.2,
self-service storage facility insurance as defined in Section
27-7-5.3, crop insurance as defined in Section 27-7-14.1,
portable electronics insurance as defined in Chapter 22A, and
any other line of insurance that the commissioner deems
necessary to recognize for the purposes of complying with
subsection (e) of Section 27-7-28.
"(14) LIMITED LINES PRODUCER. A person authorized by
the commissioner to sell, solicit, or negotiate limited lines
insurance.
"(15) NAIC. The National Association of Insurance
Commissioners.
"(16) NEGOTIATE. The act of conferring directly with
or offering advice directly to a purchaser or prospective
purchaser of a particular contract of insurance concerning any
of the substantive benefits, terms, or conditions of the
contract, provided that the person engaged in that act either
sells insurance or obtains insurance from insurers for
purchasers.
"(17) PERSON. An individual or a business entity.
"(18) PROPERTY LINES OF AUTHORITY. Any one or more
of the following lines as defined in Section 27-7-14.1:
Property; casualty; and personal lines.
"(19) SELL. To exchange a contract of insurance by
any means, for money or its equivalent, on behalf of an
insurance company.
"(20) SERVICE REPRESENTATIVE. A natural person,
other than an officer, manager, or managing general agent of
the insurer, employed on salary or at an hourly rate by an
insurer, managing general agent, or a captive producer to work
for, with or through producers in selling, soliciting, or
negotiating insurance in the insurer or in the insurers
represented by the managing general agent or a captive
producer, but only in the property lines of authority.
Officers and salaried nonresident traveling representatives of
a mutual insurer operating on the premium deposit plan or of a
reciprocal insurer not using resident producers for the
solicitation of business who inspect risks or solicit
insurance in this state and who receive no commissions from
the insurer shall be deemed also to be service
representatives. A service representative shall otherwise
qualify and be licensed as a service representative under this
chapter, but shall not be required to take and pass an
examination nor be a resident of Alabama if qualified as a
service representative in the state of his or her domicile.
The service representative must be appointed for each insurer
or association of insurers represented and for each class of
insurance handled by the insurer or insurers in this state.
"(21) SOLICIT. Attempting to sell insurance or
asking or urging a person to apply for a particular kind of
insurance from a particular company.
"(22) TERMINATE. The cancellation of the
relationship between an insurance producer and the insurer or
the termination of a producer's authority to transact
insurance.
"(23) UNIFORM BUSINESS ENTITY APPLICATION. The
current version of the NAIC Uniform Business Entity
Application for resident and nonresident business entities.
"(24) UNIFORM APPLICATION. The current version of
the NAIC Uniform Application for resident and nonresident
producer licensing."
Section 2. Section 27-7-5.3 is added to the Code of
Alabama 1975, to read as follows:
ยง27-7-5.3.
(a) As used in this section, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
(1) LIMITED LICENSEE. A person or entity authorized
to sell certain coverages for personal property maintained in
self-service storage facilities pursuant to this section.
(2) OCCUPANT. A person, his or her sublessee,
successor, or assign entitled to the use of storage space at a
self-service storage facility under a rental agreement, to the
exclusion of others.
(3) OWNER. The owner, operator, lessor, or sublessor
of a self-service storage facility, his or her agent, or any
other person authorized by him or her to manage the
self-service storage facility or to receive rent from an
occupant under a rental agreement.
(4) PERSONAL PROPERTY. Any movable property not
affixed to land including, but not limited to, goods, wares,
merchandise, motor vehicles, watercraft, and household items
and furnishings.
(5) RENTAL AGREEMENT. Any agreement or lease,
written or oral, that establishes or modifies the terms,
conditions, rules, or any other provisions concerning the use
and occupancy of storage space at a self-service storage
facility.
(6) SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY. Any real property
designed and used for the purpose of renting or leasing
individual storage space to occupants who are to have access
to the facility for the purpose of storing and removing
personal property and not for residential purposes. The term
does not include a safe-deposit box or vault maintained by
banks, trust companies, or other financial entities or a
public warehouse within the meaning of Article 1, commencing
with Section 8-15-1, of Chapter 15, Title 8.
(7) SUPERVISING ENTITY. Any business entity that is
a licensed insurance producer or insurer.
(b) Any other provision of law to the contrary
notwithstanding, the commissioner may issue to an owner that
is in compliance with the requirements of this section a
limited license authorizing the limited licensee to offer,
sell, solicit, or negotiate insurance through a licensed
insurer in connection with a self-service storage facility.
(c) All limited licensees shall be exempt from the
40-hour pre-qualification course and written examination
requirements of Section 27-7-5, and the continuing education
requirements of Chapter 8A.
(d) A limited licensee may offer, sell, solicit, or
negotiate insurance on behalf of a licensed insurer, or as
part of a group, commercial, or master policy to provide
insurance for that limited licensee's occupants, only in
connection with a rental agreement, and only for either an
individual policy issued to an individual occupant or as a
group, commercial, or master policy for occupants for personal
property insurance. A limited licensee shall only be
authorized to provide to occupants insurance coverage for the
following:
(1) The loss of or damage to personal property
stored at a self-service storage facility where the loss or
damage occurs at the self-service storage facility or while
the personal property is in transit to or from the
self-service storage facility during the time period covered
by the occupant's rental agreement.
(2) Other loss directly related to an occupant's
rental agreement.
(e) No insurance may be issued by a limited licensee
pursuant to this section unless the limited licensee provides
to a prospective purchaser written material that provides all
of the following:
(1) A summary of the terms of insurance coverage,
including the identity of the insurer.
(2) A conspicuous disclosure that the policy of
insurance may provide a duplication of coverage already
provided by an existing policy of insurance.
(3) A description of the process for filing a claim
in the event the occupant elects to purchase coverage and
experiences a covered loss.
(4) Information regarding the price, deductible,
benefits, exclusions, conditions, and any other limitations of
the policy.
(5) A statement that the purchase by the occupant of
the kinds of coverage specified in this section from the
limited licensee is not required in order to rent storage
space.
(6) A statement that the limited licensee is not
authorized to evaluate the adequacy of the occupant's existing
insurance coverages, unless the limited licensee is otherwise
licensed.
(7) A statement that the occupant may cancel the
insurance at any time, and any unearned premium shall be
refunded in accordance with applicable law.
(f) Any other provision of law to the contrary
notwithstanding, if the kinds of coverage described in this
section are required as a condition of a rental agreement,
that requirement may be satisfied by an occupant or a
prospective occupant:
(1) Purchasing coverage that is offered, sold,
solicited, or negotiated by the limited licensee; or
(2) Presenting to the self-service storage facility
evidence of other applicable insurance coverage.
(g) Any other provision of law or any rule adopted
by the commissioner to the contrary notwithstanding, a limited
licensee licensed pursuant to this section may not be required
to treat monies collected from occupants as funds received in
a fiduciary capacity, provided that the charges for coverage
shall be itemized and be ancillary to a rental agreement. The
sale of insurance not in conjunction with a rental agreement
is not permitted.
(h) A limited licensee licensed pursuant to this
section may authorize any employee or authorized
representative of the limited licensee to act individually on
behalf and under the supervision of the limited licensee with
respect to the kinds of coverage specified in this section.
(i) Each owner licensed pursuant to this section
shall provide a training program, which may be provided to the
owner by a supervising entity, in which employees and
authorized representatives of the owner shall receive basic
instruction about the kind of coverage authorized in this
section and offered for purchase by occupants or prospective
occupants.
(j) As a prerequisite for issuance of a limited
license under this section, there shall be filed with the
commissioner an application for a limited license in such form
or forms, and supplements thereto, and containing such
information as the commissioner may prescribe.
(k) No limited licensee licensed pursuant to this
section shall advertise, represent, or otherwise hold itself
or any of its employees out as licensed insurers, insurance
agents, or insurance brokers.
(l) A limited licensee may receive compensation from
a supervising entity for sales, billing, and collection
services. The compensation may be dependent on the sale of the
types of coverage described in this section.
Section 3. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.
Speaker of the House of Representatives
President and Presiding Officer of the Senate
House of Representatives
I hereby certify that the within Act originated in
and was passed by the House 27-FEB-18.
Jeff Woodard
Clerk
Senate                21-MAR-18                        Passed