SB269
189410-1
By Senator Whatley
RFD: Education and Youth Affairs
First Read: 01-FEB-18
189410-1:n:01/05/2018:KMS/bm LSA2018-76
SYNOPSIS:           This bill would revise the focus of the
content, course materials, and instruction provided
to public school students in any program or
curriculum that includes sex education or the human
reproductive process.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
To amend Section 16-40A-2, Code of Alabama 1975,
relating to public K-12 sex education; to revise the focus of
the content, course materials, and instruction provided to
students.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Section 16-40A-2 of the Code of Alabama
1975, is amended to read as follows:
"ยง16-40A-2.
"(a) Any program or curriculum in the public schools
in Alabama that includes sex education or the human
reproductive process shall, as a minimum, include and
emphasize the following:
"(1) Abstinence from sexual intercourse sex is the
only completely effective protection against unwanted
unintended pregnancy, sexually transmitted diseases
infections, and acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) when transmitted sexually.
"(2) Abstinence from sexual intercourse sex outside
of lawful marriage is the expected social standard for
unmarried school-age persons.
"(b) Course materials and instruction that relate to
sexual health education or sexually transmitted diseases
infections should be age-appropriate, medically accurate, and
culturally appropriate.
"(c) Course materials and instruction that relate to
sexual health education or sexually transmitted diseases
infections should include all of the following elements:
"(1) An emphasis on sexual abstinence as the only
completely reliable method of avoiding unwanted unintended
teenage pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases
infections.
"(2) An emphasis on the importance of self-control
and ethical conduct pertaining to delaying sexual activity and
discouraging risky sexual behavior.
"(3) Statistics based on the latest medical
information that indicate the degree of reliability and
unreliability of various forms of contraception, while also
emphasizing the increase in protection against pregnancy and
protection against sexually transmitted diseases infections,
including HIV and AIDS infection, which is afforded by the use
of various contraceptive measures.
"(4) Information concerning the laws relating to the
financial responsibilities associated with pregnancy,
childbirth, and child rearing.
"(5) Information concerning the laws prohibiting
sexual abuse, the need to report such abuse, and the legal
options available to victims of sexual abuse.
"(6) Information on how to cope with and rebuff
unwanted physical and verbal sexual exploitation by other
persons.
"(7) Psychologically sound methods of resisting
unwanted peer pressure.
"(8) An emphasis, in a factual manner and from a
public health perspective, that homosexuality is not a
lifestyle acceptable to the general public and that homosexual
conduct is a criminal offense under the laws of the state.
"(9)(8) Comprehensive instruction in parenting
skills and responsibilities, including the responsibility to
pay child support by non-custodial parents, the penalties for
non-payment of child support, and the legal and ethical
responsibilities of child care and child rearing."
Section 2. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.