SB187
189595-1
By Senators Hightower, Orr, Albritton, Chambliss, Livingston,
Marsh, Pittman, Williams, Stutts and Waggoner (Constitutional
Amendment)
RFD: Fiscal Responsibility and Economic Development
First Read: 16-JAN-18
189595-1:n:01/10/2018:LSA-HP/jmb
SYNOPSIS:           This proposed amendment would require any
tax credit, exemption, deduction, or preferential
tax rate enacted beginning in the 2019 Regular
Session of the Legislature to expire within seven
years from the effective date of the act
authorizing the tax expenditure, unless extended by
an act of the Legislature.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
Proposing an amendment to the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, to require any tax credit, exemption,
deduction, or preferential tax rate enacted beginning in the
2019 Regular Session of the Legislature to expire within seven
years from the effective date of the act authorizing the tax
expenditure, unless extended by an act of the Legislature.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. The following amendment to the
Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as amended, is proposed and
shall become valid as a part thereof when approved by a
majority of the qualified electors voting thereon and in
accordance with Sections 284, 285, and 287 of the Constitution
of Alabama of 1901, as amended:
PROPOSED AMENDMENT
Beginning in the 2019 Regular Session of the
Legislature, any tax expenditure enacted shall expire within
seven years from the effective date of the act authorizing the
tax expenditure, unless extended by an act of the Legislature.
For purposes of this amendment, the term "tax expenditure"
shall mean any provision of law which allows a special
exclusion, exemption, or deduction, or which provides a
special credit or preferential tax rate that creates a loss of
revenue for the state.
Section 2. An election upon the proposed amendment
shall be held in accordance with Sections 284 and 285 of the
Constitution of Alabama of 1901, now appearing as Sections 284
and 285 of the Official Recompilation of the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, as amended, and the election laws of this
state.
Section 3. The appropriate election official shall
assign a ballot number for the proposed constitutional
amendment on the election ballot and shall set forth the
following description of the substance or subject matter of
the proposed constitutional amendment:
"Proposing an amendment to the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, to require any tax credit, exemption,
deduction, or preferential tax rate enacted beginning in the
2019 Regular Session of the Legislature to expire within seven
years from the effective date of the act authorizing the tax
expenditure, unless extended by an act of the Legislature.
"Proposed by Act ________."
This description shall be followed by the following
language:
"Yes ( ) No ( )."