HB76
190627-5
By Representatives Warren and Brown
RFD: Children and Senior Advocacy
First Read: 09-JAN-18
PFD: 01/08/2018
ENGROSSED
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
Relating to child care facilities; to amend Sections
13A-6-29, 38-7-2, 38-7-3, 38-13-2, and 38-13-3, Code of
Alabama 1975; to add a new Section 38-7-21 to the Code of
Alabama 1975; to establish the Child Care Safety Act; to
revise the definition of day care center to include
preschools; to remove the exemption from licensure by the
Department of Human Resources of certain child care facilities
that are part of a church or nonprofit religious school; to
clarify that the licensing of a faith-based child care
facility may not be construed to infringe upon the rights of
the facility to teach or practice a religion; and to revise
the criminal history background information check required for
certain individuals.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. This act shall be known and may be cited
as the Child Care Safety Act.
Section 2. Sections 13A-6-29, 38-7-2, 38-7-3,
38-13-2, and 38-13-3, Code of Alabama 1975, are amended to
read as follows:
"§13A-6-29.
"(a) As used in this section, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
"(1) MEDICALLY PRESCRIBED. In accordance with a
physician's prescription or in accordance with age-appropriate
directions for the over-the-counter medication.
"(2) NEAR FATALITY. An act that, as certified by a
physician, places the child in serious or critical condition.
"(b) There is established the crime of
administration of medication by the owner, operator, or
employee of a licensed or statutorily exempt child care
facility with the intent to drug the child or alter the
child's behavior beyond what is medically prescribed or with
the reckless disregard for the health, safety, and welfare of
the child.
"(c) A violation of subsection (b) is punishable as
follows:
"(1) A violation which does not cause or contributes
to the death, near fatality, dismemberment, or permanent
disability of a child is a Class C felony.
"(2) A violation which causes a near fatality,
dismemberment, or permanent disability of a child is a Class B
felony.
"(3) A violation which causes the death of a child
is a Class A felony.
"§38-7-2.
"Terms used in this chapter, unless the context
otherwise requires, have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in
the present tense include the future, words in the singular
number include the plural number, and words in the plural
number include the singular number, and the word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory:
"(1) CHILD. Any person under 19 years of age, a
person under the continuing jurisdiction of the juvenile court
pursuant to Section 12-15-117, or a person under 21 years of
age in foster care as defined by the Department of Human
Resources.
"(2) CHILD-CARE INSTITUTION or INSTITUTION FOR CHILD
CARE. A child-care facility where more than 10 children are
received and maintained for the purpose of providing them with
care or training or both, or transitional living program
services, but does not include:
"a. Any institution for child care which is under
the ownership or control, or both, of the State of Alabama, or
which is operated or certified or licensed by another agency
or department of the State of Alabama;
"b. Any juvenile detention home established and
operated by the State of Alabama;
"c. Any bona fide boarding school in which children
are primarily taught branches of education corresponding to
those taught in public schools, grades 1 through 12, or taught
in public elementary schools, high schools, or both elementary
and high schools.
"(3) CHILD-PLACING AGENCY. A public or private
child-care facility which receives, places, or arranges for
the placement of any child or children in adoptive or foster
family homes or other facilities for child care apart from the
custody of the child's or children's parents. The term
"child-placing agency" includes, but is not limited to, all
agencies established and maintained by a municipality or other
political subdivision of the State of Alabama to protect,
guard, train, or care for children outside their own homes,
but does not include any circuit court or juvenile court or
any duly appointed juvenile probation officer or youth
counselor of the court who receives and places children under
an order of the court.
"(4) DAY CARE CENTER. Any child-care facility
receiving more than 12 children for daytime care during all or
part of a day. The term "day care center" includes, but is not
limited to, facilities commonly called "child-care centers,"
"day nurseries," "nursery schools," "pre-kindergartens,"
"preschools," "kindergartens," and "play groups," with or
without stated educational purposes. The term further
includes, but is not limited to, pre-kindergarten, preschool,
kindergarten, or nursery schools or other daytime programs
operated as a part of a private school and receiving children
younger than lawful school age for daytime care for more than
four hours a day, with or without stated educational purposes.
The term does not include any of the following:
"a. Kindergartens or nursery schools or other
daytime programs operated by public elementary systems or
secondary level school units or institutions of higher
learning.
"b. Kindergartens or nursery schools or other
daytime programs, with or without stated educational purposes,
operating no more than four hours a day and receiving children
younger than lawful school age.
"c. Kindergartens or nursery schools or other
daytime programs operated as a part of a private school and
receiving children younger than lawful school age for four
hours a day or less, with or without stated educational
purposes.
"d. Facilities operated for more than four hours a
day in connection with a shopping center or service or other
similar facility, where transient children are cared for
temporarily while parents or custodians of the children are
occupied on the premises or are in the immediate vicinity and
readily available. The facilities shall meet local and state
fire and health requirements.
"e. Any type of day care center that is conducted on
federal government premises.
"f. Special activities programs for children of
lawful school age including, but not limited to, athletics,
crafts instruction and similar activities conducted on an
organized and periodic basis by civic, charitable, and
governmental organizations provided local and state fire and
health requirements are met.
"(5) DAY CARE HOME. A child-care facility which is a
family home and which receives not more than six children for
care during the day.
"(6) DEPARTMENT. The Department of Human Resources
of the State of Alabama.
"(7) FACILITY FOR CHILD CARE or CHILD-CARE FACILITY.
A facility established by any person, group of persons,
agency, association, or organization, whether established for
gain or otherwise, who or which receives or arranges for care
or placement of one or more children, unrelated to the
operator of the facility, apart from the parents, with or
without the transfer of the right of custody, in any facility
as defined in this chapter, established and maintained for the
care of children.
"(8) FOSTER FAMILY HOME. A child-care facility in a
residence of a family where the family receives a child or
children, unrelated to that family, for the purpose of
providing family care or therapeutic family care and training,
or transitional living program services on a full-time basis.
The types of foster family homes are defined as follows:
"a. Boarding home. A foster family home wherein the
foster family receives a child or children and receives
payment for their care. The number of children so received
shall not exceed six, unless the children are of common
parentage.
"b. Free home. A foster home which does not receive
payment for the care of a child or children and which may or
may not receive the child or children for the purpose of
adoption.
"(9) GROUP DAY CARE HOME. A child-care facility
which is a family home and which receives at least seven but
no more than 12 children for care during part of the day where
there are at least two adults present and supervising the
activities.
"(10) GROUP HOME. A child-care facility where at
least seven but not more than 10 children are received and
maintained for the purpose of providing them with care or
training or both, or transitional living program services.
"(11) MATERNITY CENTER. A facility in which any
person, agency, or corporation receives or cares for one or
more minor pregnant girls, except that the term does not
include hospitals.
"(12) NIGHT CARE FACILITY. A child-care facility
which is a center or a family home receiving a child or
children for care during the night. A "night care facility" is
further defined as follows:
"a. Nighttime center. A facility which is
established to receive more than 12 children for nighttime
care.
"b. Nighttime home. A family home which receives no
more than six children for nighttime care.
"c. Group nighttime home. A child-care facility
which is a family home which receives at least seven but no
more than 12 children for nighttime care and where there are
at least two adults present and supervising the activities.
"(13) RELATED. Any of the following relationships by
blood, marriage, or adoption: Parent, grandparent, brother,
sister, stepparent, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother,
half sister, uncle or aunt, and their spouses.
"(14) TRANSITIONAL LIVING FACILITY. A child-care
facility or program that is designed to give opportunities to
practice independent living skills to eligible persons at
least 16 years of age and under 21 years of age in foster care
in a variety of residential settings with varying degrees of
care and supervision.
"§38-7-3.
"(a) No person, group of persons, or corporation may
operate or conduct any facility for child care, as defined in
this chapter, without being licensed or approved as provided
in this chapter. ; provided, however, that nothing in this
section or in this chapter prohibits an employee of the
department from carrying out the duties of the department as
provided in this title. Provided, further, the provisions of
this chapter shall
"(b)(1) Except as provided in subdivision (2), the
licensure requirements of this chapter do not apply to
preschool programs which are a child care facility that is
operating as an integral part of a local church ministry or a
religious nonprofit elementary school, and are is so
recognized in the church or school's documents, whether
operated separately or as a part of a religious nonprofit
elementary school unit, secondary school unit or institution
of higher learning under the governing board or authority of
said the local church or its convention, association, or
regional body to which it may be subject.; provided that
notice is filed by the governing board or authority of the
church or school with the department that said church or
school meets the definition of a local church ministry or a
religious nonprofit elementary school under terms of this
section and are exempt from regulation by the department.
"(2) A child care facility that receives state or
federal funds, is operating for profit, or has at least one
child who receives a child care subsidy from the department is
federal funds or is operating for profit is not exempt from
licensure under this subsection.
"(c) A child care facility exempt from licensure
under subsection (b) shall do all of the following to maintain
its license exempt status:
"(1) and a notice of intent to operate said programs
is given Provide notice of operation on an annual basis to the
appropriate fire and health departments so that said
facilities shall the facility may be inspected in accordance
with the state and local fire and health requirements,
provided the facility shall be inspected at least annually by
the appropriate fire department and the appropriate health
department. for such programs. In addition, all exempt
churches hereunder shall publish annually, on church
letterhead, a notice to the department certifying that the
following records are being maintained by the church:
"(2) Provide to the department on or before October
1, 2018, and annually thereafter, the following records and
certify that the records are being maintained by the church or
school:
"a. Documentation indicating the child care facility
is in compliance with fire inspections and health inspection
reports; inspections.
"b. Employee names and their criminal history
information pursuant to Section 38-13-3.
"c. Proof of property, casualty, and liability
insurance, as prescribed by the department.
"(3) Provide to the department, upon request,
immunization verifications for all children; and medical
history forms for all staff and children, and that the
following information shall be available to parents or
guardian prior to enrolling their children in said church
ministry; staff and certify that the records are being
maintained by the church or school.
"(4) Provide the department within 30 days of any
updated fire inspection report, health inspection report, new
criminal background check suitability letter, or receipt of
updated insurance information as required under subdivision
(2).
"(5) Provide notice to parents or guardians of all
of the following information prior to enrollment of a child in
the child care facility:
"a. Staff qualifications.;
"b. pupil-staff Pupil-staff ratio.;
"c. discipline Discipline policies.;
"d. The type of curriculum used in the learning
program.;
"e. the The religious teachings to be given each
child.;
"f. and the The type of lunch program available. ;
provided further that prior to enrolling and annually
thereafter parents or guardian and a responsible individual
representing the governing board as authority of the church or
school be required to sign and file with the department the
affidavits provided by this section that the parents or
guardian have been notified by said responsible individual
that the church or school has filed notice and is exempt from
regulation by the department. The district attorney of the
county in which the preschool program is located shall, upon
proper presentment of charges, investigate at his discretion
any allegations against any such church under the laws of the
State of Alabama.
"(6) Post in plain view in a public area a statement
that the program is not regulated or licensed by the
Department of Human Resources.
"(7) Require a parent or guardian to sign an
affidavit stating that the parent or guardian has been
notified by the responsible individual of the church or school
that the child care facility has filed notice to the
department and is exempt from licensure and regulation by the
department. The child care facility shall file the affidavits
annually with the department. The affidavit shall be
substantially in the following form:
"Form of Affidavit for Parent/Guardian
"STATE OF ALABAMA
"COUNTY OF _____
"Before me, a notary public in and for said state
and county, appeared _____ and is known to me, after being
duly sworn or affirmed, says as follows:
"That affiant is the parent or legal guardian of the
minor child/children _____; that affiant has been notified by
_____, a representative of _____ church/school, that said
church or school has filed notice and is exempt under law from
regulation by the Department of Human Resources.
"______ Parent/Legal Guardian
"Sworn, or affirmed to and subscribed before me this
_____ day of _____, 20__.
"(8) A responsible individual of the child care
facility shall file an affidavit annually with the department
certifying that it has satisfied all of the requirements of
this section. The affidavit shall be substantially in the
following form:
"Form of Affidavit for Church/School
"STATE OF ALABAMA
"COUNTY OF _____
"Before me, a notary public in and for said state
and county, appeared _____ and is known to me, after being
duly sworn or affirmed says as follows:
"That affiant is the designated representative of
_____ church/school and that the below listed
parents/guardians have been notified prior to
enrollment/reenrollment that _____ church/school has filed
notice with and is exempt under law from regulation by the
Department of Human Resources: ______
"_______________ Representative
"The affiant certifies that the child care facility
does not receive state or federal funds and, that to the best
of the affiant's knowledge, no child enrolled in the program
receives a child care subsidy from the Department of Human
Resources; the facility is in compliance with all applicable
building, fire, and health codes; the facility has provided
the information requested under Section 38-7-3, Code of
Alabama 1975, to all parents or guardians of children enrolled
in the facility; and the facility has posted notice in plain
view in a public area stating that the child care facility is
not licensed or regulated by the Department of Human
Resources.
"Sworn or affirmed to and subscribed before me this
____ day of ______, 20__.
"_______________ Notary Public
"(d)(1) On and after the effective date of the act
adding this amendatory language, any church or nonprofit
religious school intending to operate a new child care
facility in the state shall notify the department at least 30
days prior to operating, and the department shall inspect the
facility and ensure compliance with this section before the
facility may begin operating.
"(2) The department shall inspect any child care
facility that is exempt from licensure under subsection (b) at
any time if it has reasonable cause to believe the facility is
not in compliance with this section or the safety of a child
is at risk. If the department finds there exists a situation
that may put the safety of a child at risk, the department may
refer to the fire or health department or to the local
district attorney for the proper remedy or action.
"(e) The district attorney of the county in which a
child care facility that is exempt from licensure under
subsection (b) is located, upon presentment of charges, shall
investigate at his or her discretion, any allegations against
the church or nonprofit religious school operating the
facility under the laws of the state.
"(f) The department, upon request, shall provide any
documentation necessary to confirm any of the information
relevant to a determination of whether a child care facility
is exempt under subsection (b) to the district attorney.
"(g) Any child care facility that is exempt from
licensure under subsection (b), upon request by the
department, shall provide the department with any information
listed in subsection (c) within 15 days.
"(h) Nothing in this section or in this chapter
prohibits an employee of the department from carrying out the
duties of the department as prescribed in this title.
"(i) Nothing in this section or in this chapter
infringes upon the religious teaching or practices of a
licensed faith-based child care facility.
"§38-13-2.
"When used in this chapter, the following words
shall have the following meanings:
"(1) ADULT. An individual 19 years of age and older.
"(2) ADULT CARE FACILITY. A person or entity holding
a Department of Human Resources license or approval or
certification to provide care, including foster care, for
adults.
"(3) APPLICANT. A person or entity who submits an
application for license as a child care or adult care facility
to the Department of Human Resources or a child placing
agency, or an application for employment or for a volunteer
position to a Department of Human Resources licensed child
care or adult care facility. With regards to child care and
adult care facilities in a home setting, the term includes an
adult household member whose residence is in the home. The
term also includes an individual who submits an application
for a volunteer position or for employment with the Department
of Human Resources in a position in which the person has
unsupervised access to children, adults, or individuals with
disabilities as one of the essential functions of the job. The
term also includes an applicant for approval as an adoptive
parent of a child or as a foster parent of an adult or child.
"(4) AUTOMATED SYSTEM. The computerized, automated
fingerprint identification system (AFIS) maintained by the
Department of Public Safety Alabama State Law Enforcement
Agency that allows for a computer search of the in-state
database for criminal history background check information
maintained by the Alabama Criminal Justice Information Center
(ACJIC). The system contains criminal history background
information for fingerprint-based and name-based searches.
"(5) CARE. The provision of care, treatment,
education, training, instruction, supervision, or recreation
to children, adults, or individuals with disabilities.
"(6) CARETAKER SETTING. A building, structure, or
location, public or private property, or vehicle, utilized for
or involved in the providing of care, education, training,
instruction, or supervision of children, adults, or
individuals with disabilities or transportation in connection
with activity provided by a licensed, approved, or certified
child or adult care facility.
"(7) CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER. The Commissioner of
the Department of Human Resources, the director of a county
department of human resources, or the head of an employer
covered by this chapter, but not specifically enumerated.
"(8) CHILD or CHILDREN. An individual under 19 years
of age.
"(9) CHILD CARE FACILITY. A person or entity holding
a Department of Human Resources license, permit, or approval
to provide child care, including foster care, under Chapter 7
of this title. The term excludes includes exempt child care
facilities.
"(10) CHILD PLACING AGENCY. A person or entity
licensed by the Department of Human Resources under Chapter 7
of this title, issuing approvals to foster family homes and
adoptive homes.
"(11) CONVICTION. A determination of guilt as the
result of a plea, including a plea of nolo contendere, or a
trial.
"(12) CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND INFORMATION CHECK.
The review of any and all records containing any information
collected and stored in the criminal record repository of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Alabama Criminal Justice
Information Center, and the Alabama Department of Public
Safety State Law Enforcement Agency involving an arrest or
conviction by a criminal justice agency, including, but not
limited to, child abuse crime information as defined by 42
U.S.C. § 5119, the National Child Protection Act of 1993,
conviction record information, fingerprint cards, correctional
data and release information, and identifiable descriptions
and notations of convictions. Criminal history background
information shall not include any analytical records or
investigative reports that contain intelligence information or
criminal investigation information.
"(13) CURRENT. An individual who is presently
employed, licensed, or approved, or working as a volunteer on
November 1, 2000.
"(14) DAILY LIVING TASKS. Activities of daily
living, including walking, working, learning, grooming and
hygiene, bathing, dressing, eating, cooking, cleaning,
shopping, transportation, managing money, maintaining a
residence, writing, and using telephones, computers, and other
automated communication devices.
"(15) ELDERLY. An individual 65 years of age or
older.
"(16) EMPLOYEE. An individual currently in the
service of an employer for compensation, full-time or
part-time, and employed by contract or at will, in which the
employer has the authority to control the person in the
material details of how work shall be performed and when
compensation shall be provided.
"(17) EMPLOYER. An individual, person, group of
persons, association, partnership, corporation, limited
liability company or partnership, business, or other entity
which hires employees, has volunteers, or contracts with
others to provide personnel to work with or provide care to
children, adults, or individuals with disabilities in a
caretaker setting.
"(18) ESSENTIAL FUNCTIONS. The fundamental, not
merely marginal, job duties of the employment as determined by
a written job description or the judgment of the employer.
"(19) EXEMPT CARE FACILITY. A person or entity
exempt by law from licensure by the Department of Human
Resources, or a child placing agency, including church day
care, child centers, or elder centers adult care facilities.
"(20) INDIVIDUAL. A natural person.
"(21) INDIVIDUAL WITH DISABILITIES. A person with a
mental or physical impairment who requires assistance to
perform one or more daily living tasks.
"(22) LAW ENFORCEMENT. The sheriff's department of a
county or the police department of a municipality.
"(23) LICENSE. A license, permit, certification,
approval, registration, or other form of permission required
by law by whatever designation for a child care facility,
adult care facility, child placing agency, foster parent or
foster home, adoptive parent or adoptive home, or any other
person or entity in which an individual has unsupervised
access to children, the elderly, or individuals with
disabilities.
"(24) LICENSED SOCIAL WORKER. A social worker
licensed by the Alabama State Board of Social Work Examiners
to conduct family home studies and psychosocial assessments in
adoptive or custody cases by court order or for treatment not
otherwise required to conduct a criminal history check.
"(25) LICENSEE. Holder of a license or approval and
an adult household member whose residence is in the home in
regards to child care and adult care facilities in a home
setting.
"(26) PERSON or ENTITY. A natural person, sometimes
referred to as an individual, an owner or operator of any
adult care facility, child care facility, child placing
agency, exempt child care facility, or licensee, whether an
individual, corporation, limited liability company or
partnership, partnership, association, or other legal entity
or group, and a board member, an officer, member, or partner
of an entity who has direct contact with children, the
elderly, or individuals with disabilities in care.
"(27) REASONABLE SUSPICION. Belief by a prudent
person that reasonable articulable grounds exist to suspect
that the employee's past or present behavior should be
reviewed to determine if such behavior or conduct bears upon
the individual's fitness to teach or supervise or have
responsibility for the safety and well-being of children, the
elderly, or persons with disabilities as defined in this
chapter.
"(28) REPORT. A written statement of criminal
history background information.
"(29) RESIDENCE. Place of abode, domicile, or
dwelling with intention to remain permanently and continuously
or for an indefinite or uncertain length of time.
"(30) SEX CRIME. Includes any sex crime listed in
Section 15-20A-5. the following:
"a. Enticing a child to enter a vehicle, room,
house, office, or any other place for immoral purposes, as
proscribed by Section 13A-6-69.
"b. Incest, when the offender is an adult and the
victim is a minor, as proscribed by Section 13A-13-3.
"c. Kidnapping of a minor, except by a parent, in
the first or second degree, as proscribed by Section 13A-6-43
or Section 13A-6-44.
"d. Promoting prostitution in the first or second
degree, as proscribed by Section 13A-12-111 or Section
13A-12-112.
"e. Rape in the first or second degree, as
proscribed by Section 13A-6-61 or Section 13A-6-62.
"f. Sexual misconduct, as proscribed by Section
13A-6-65.
"g. Sexual torture, as proscribed by Section
13A-6-65.1.
"h. Sexual abuse in the first or second degree, as
proscribed by Section 13A-6-66 or Section 13A-6-67.
"i. Sodomy in the first or second degree, as
proscribed by Section 13A-6-63 or Section 13A-6-64.
"j. Soliciting a child by computer for the purposes
of committing a sexual act and transmitting obscene material
to a child by computer as proscribed by Sections 13A-6-110 and
13A-6-111.
"k. Violation of the Alabama Child Pornography Act,
as proscribed by Section 13A-12-191, 13A-12-192, 13A-12-196,
or 13A-12-197.
"l. Any solicitation, attempt, or conspiracy to
commit any of the offenses listed in paragraphs a. to k.,
inclusive.
"m. A crime listed in the Alabama Sex Offender
Registration and Community Notification Act, Chapter 20A of
Title 15.
"n. Conviction for a violation or attempted
violation of an offense committed outside the State of Alabama
or under federal law is a sex crime or any other crime if the
offense would be a crime in Alabama.
"(31) SUITABILITY CRITERIA.
"a. Convictions for any of the following crimes
shall make an individual unsuitable for employment, volunteer
work, approval, or licensure:
"1. Murder, manslaughter, or criminally negligent
homicide A violent offense as defined in Section 12-25-32.
"2. A sex crime.
"3. A crime that involves the physical or mental
injury or maltreatment of a child, the elderly, or an
individual with disabilities.
"4. A crime committed against a child.
"5. A crime involving the sale or distribution of a
controlled substance.
"6. Robbery.
"7.6. A crime or offense committed in another state
or under federal law which would constitute any of the above
crimes in this state.
"b. Conviction for any crime listed in the Adoption
and Safe Families Act, 42 U.S.C. § 671(a)(20) shall disqualify
a person from being approved or continuing to be approved as a
foster parent or adoptive parent and a convicted person shall
be deemed unsuitable for employment, volunteer work, approval,
or licensure as a foster parent or adoptive parent.
"c. The Department of Human Resources may set other
disqualifying convictions by rule under the Administrative
Procedure Act, Section 41-22-1, et seq., for Department of
Human Resources licensed child or adult care facilities.
"(32) SUITABILITY DETERMINATION. A decision that an
individual is or is not suitable for employment, volunteer
work, or licensure based upon the existence of a prohibited
criminal conviction.
"(33) UNSUPERVISED ACCESS TO A CHILD OR CHILDREN,
THE ELDERLY, OR AN INDIVIDUAL WITH DISABILITIES. Contacts,
interviews, questions, examinations, interaction, or
communications outside the presence, supervision, and control
of someone other than a child or elderly or disabled
individual in care during the provision of care, education,
training, instruction, supervision, or other employment or
license related activities.
"(34) VOLUNTEER. An individual who provides services
without an express or implied promise of compensation, but
shall not include the parent, family member, legal custodian,
or legal guardian of a child, the elderly, or disabled
individual in care.
"(35) WRITTEN CONSENT. A signed statement by the
applicant or employee containing all of the following:
"a. The name, address, date of birth, race, gender,
and Social Security number appearing on a valid identification
document as defined in subsection (d) of 18 U.S.C. § 1028. If
the applicant does not have a Social Security number because
of sincerely held personal beliefs, the Social Security number
shall not be required and the Department of Human Resources
and the Department of Public Safety Alabama State Law
Enforcement Agency shall provide an alternative means of
identification and procedure.
"b. Notice to the applicant or employee of the right
to obtain a copy of the criminal history background
information check report, challenge the accuracy and
completeness of any information contained in the report, and
to obtain a prompt determination as to the validity of a
challenge.
"c. Name, address, and telephone number of the
employer or licensing entity for which the criminal history
background information check report is being sought.
"d. Release of the criminal history background
information check report to the Department of Human Resources.
"§38-13-3.
"(a) On November 1, 2000, every employer, child care
facility, adult care facility, the Department of Human
Resources, and child placing agency shall request the
Department of Public Safety Alabama State Law Enforcement
Agency to conduct a criminal history background information
check for the following:
"(1) An employment applicant, employee or volunteer
of an employer, child care facility, adult care facility, or
child placing agency.
"(2) A current foster parent for a child or adult or
adult household member of a foster family or applicant and an
adult household member of a foster family seeking approval to
operate as a foster parent or foster family home for a child
placing agency or the Department of Human Resources. Unless
otherwise provided in this chapter, no criminal history
background information check shall be conducted on a current
foster parent or household member of a foster family if a
Federal Bureau of Investigation and Alabama Department of
Public Safety State Law Enforcement Agency criminal history
background information check has already been conducted under
other law that meets the suitability criteria as provided in
this chapter. Subsequent arrests or convictions of foster
parents, or arrests or convictions entered into the automated
system subsequent to the initial report, shall be sent by the
Department of Public Safety Alabama State Law Enforcement
Agency to the Department of Human Resources as provided in
this chapter.
"(3) An applicant or employee, with the exception of
those individuals on employed status on November 1, 2000, in a
position in the Department of Human Resources which requires
unsupervised access to children, the elderly, or individuals
with disabilities as one of the essential functions of the
job. All current employees of the Department of Human
Resources shall be subjected to a criminal history background
information check upon reasonable suspicion. Criminal history
background information checks shall be required for
prospective and current personnel under contract with the
Department of Human Resources or working with another entity
under contract with the Department of Human Resources,
students, mentors, and volunteers in positions requiring
unsupervised access to children, the elderly, or persons with
disabilities as one of the essential functions of the job. The
Department of Human Resources shall pay any fees related to
checks required pursuant to this subdivision.
"(4) A current licensee or applicant for a license
through the Department of Human Resources to operate a child
care or adult care facility.
"(5) An adoptive parent applicant for a child
adoptive placement through the Department of Human Resources
or child placing agency and any Department of Human Resources
or child placing agency approved adoptive parent prior to
entry of a final decree of adoption. Unless otherwise provided
in this chapter, no criminal history background information
check shall be conducted on a current adoptive parent or
household member of an adoptive family if a Federal Bureau of
Investigation and Alabama Department of Public Safety State
Law Enforcement Agency criminal history background information
check has already been conducted under other law that meets
the suitability criteria as provided in this chapter.
Subsequent arrests or convictions of adoptive parents, or
arrests or convictions entered into the automated system
subsequent to the initial report, shall be sent by the
Department of Public Safety Alabama State Law Enforcement
Agency to the Department of Human Resources as elsewhere
provided in this chapter.
"(b) An employer, child care facility, adult care
facility, the Department of Human Resources, or a child
placing agency may only request a criminal history background
information check by its chief executive officer, or his or
her designee authorized in writing and notarized, and law
enforcement shall render assistance, including assistance in
obtaining fingerprints required for submission of a request to
the Department of Public Safety Alabama State Law Enforcement
Agency.
"(c) Every employee, volunteer or applicant, for
employment or a volunteer position, licensee, Department of
Human Resources adoptive parent applicant or approved adoptive
parent, or applicant for a license to the Department of Human
Resources to operate a child care or adult care facility shall
submit two sets of fingerprints and sign a written consent to
obtain the criminal history background information.
Fingerprints shall not be required when a disability prevents
a person from being fingerprinted. Disabilities preventing
fingerprinting include the loss of both hands, severe scarring
of all fingers, closed paralytic hands, and similar
disabilities. In cases involving disability, a written consent
to obtain available criminal history background information by
name only shall be obtained. No one who fails or refuses to
give written consent or submit fingerprints necessary to
obtain criminal history background information may be
employed, allowed to perform volunteer or other work, approved
or issued a license, or allowed to retain a license or
approval by the Department of Human Resources, an employer,
child care facility, adult care facility, or child placing
agency.
"(d) Child care facilities or adult Adult care
facilities exempt from Department of Human Resources licensing
shall not be required to comply with this chapter, but may
voluntarily collect and forward two complete acceptable sets
of fingerprints, the written consent, and nonrefundable fee
from applicants or employees to the Department of Public
Safety Alabama State Law Enforcement Agency to request a
criminal history background information check which shall be
processed pursuant to this chapter. Licensed social workers
conducting home studies may also request a criminal history
background check which shall be processed pursuant to this
chapter. Provided, however, if a license-exempt child care
facility operated as part of a church ministry or religious
school does not choose to comply with this chapter on a
voluntary basis, then the employee or prospective employee of
the child care facility shall request a criminal history
background check, and the request shall be processed in the
same manner as for other employees or applicants under the
provisions of this chapter. The Department of Human Resources
shall, prior to the disbursement of any subsidized child care
funds, require all employees and applicants of legally
operating child care facilities to submit verification of the
application for a criminal history background check and the
results thereof when obtained. Upon reasonable suspicion that
the individual has a criminal conviction or has not had a
criminal history background check conducted, the Department of
Human Resources shall have the right to require employees of
license-exempt child care or adult care facilities to submit
each application for a criminal history background check and
the results thereof when obtained."
Section 3. Section 38-7-21 is added to the Code of
Alabama 1975, to read as follows:
§38-7-21.
A church, religious nonprofit entity, or religious
nonprofit school that has been operating a day care center or
preschool program without a license prior to the effective
date of the act adding this section that chooses to become a
licensed day care center under this chapter shall have 90 days
from the effective date of the act adding this section to come
into compliance with all licensing requirements of this
chapter and related rules adopted by the department, except
the church, religious nonprofit entity, or religious nonprofit
school shall not be required to meet minimum standards for
licensed day care centers or nighttime centers relating to
physical building design, size, and fixtures for existing
construction.
Section 4. A child care facility that is an integral
part of a church or nonprofit religious school, other than a
child care facility exempt from licensure under subsection (b)
of Section 38-7-3, Code of Alabama 1975, as amended by this
act, shall be licensed in accordance with Chapter 7, Title 38,
Code of Alabama 1975, no later than August 1, 2019.
Section 5. This act shall become effective
immediately following its passage and approval by the
Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.
House of Representatives
Read for the first time and re-
ferred to the House of Representa-
tives committee on Children and Se-
nior Advocacy......................    ....... 09-JAN-18
Reported from Children and Senior
Advocacy as Favorable with 1 sub-
stitute............................    ....... 30-JAN-18
Read for the third time and passed
as amended.........................    ....... 01-FEB-18
Yeas 86, Nays 5, Abstains 1
Jeff Woodard
Clerk