SB348
192262-1
By Senators Beasley, McClendon, Allen, Dial, Holley, Stutts,
Melson, Singleton, Dunn, Coleman-Madison and Smitherman
RFD: Health and Human Services
First Read: 27-FEB-18
192262-1:n:02/26/2018:KBH/th LSA2018-1055
SYNOPSIS:            Existing law provides auditing procedures
for pharmacy records by or on behalf of certain
entities.
This bill would further provide auditing
procedures for pharmacy records and would limit
recoupment for certain errors by a pharmacy.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
To amend Sections 34-23-181, 34-23-184, 34-23-185,
and 34-23-186 of the Code of Alabama 1975, relating to
auditing procedures for pharmacy records; to further provide
for auditing procedures; and to limit recoupment for certain
errors by a pharmacy.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Sections 34-23-181, 34-23-184, 34-23-185,
and 34-23-186 of the Code of Alabama 1975, are amended to read
as follows:
"ยง34-23-181.
"The following words shall have the following
meanings as used in this article:
"(1) HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN. Any individual or group
plan, employee welfare benefit plan, policy, or contract for
health care services issued, delivered, issued for delivery,
or renewed in this state by a health care insurer, health
maintenance organization, accident and sickness insurer,
fraternal benefit society, nonprofit hospital service
corporation, nonprofit medical service corporation, health
care service plan, or any other person, firm, corporation,
joint venture, or other similar business entity that pays for
insureds or beneficiaries in this state. The term includes,
but is not limited to, entities created pursuant to Article 6
of Chapter 4 of Title 10. A health benefit plan located or
domiciled outside of the State of Alabama is deemed to be
subject to this article if it receives, processes,
adjudicates, pays, or denies claims for health care services
submitted by or on behalf of patients, insureds, or
beneficiaries who reside in Alabama.
"(2) PHARMACY. A place licensed by the Alabama State
Board of Pharmacy in which prescriptions, drugs, medicines,
medical devices, chemicals, and poisons are sold, offered for
sale, compounded, or dispensed and shall include all places
whose title may imply the sale, offering for sale,
compounding, or dispensing of prescriptions, drugs, medicines,
chemicals, or poisons.
"(3) PHARMACY BENEFIT MANAGEMENT PLAN. An
arrangement for the delivery of pharmacist services in which a
pharmacy benefit manager undertakes to administer the payment
or reimbursement of any of the costs of pharmacist services
for an enrollee on a prepaid or insured basis that contains
one or more incentive arrangements intended to influence the
cost or level of pharmacist services between the plan sponsor
and one or more pharmacies with respect to the delivery of
pharmacist services and requires or creates benefit payment
differential incentives for enrollees to use under contract
with the pharmacy benefit manager.
"(4) PHARMACY BENEFIT MANAGER. A business that
administers the prescription drug or device portion of
pharmacy benefit management plans or health insurance plans on
behalf of plan sponsors, insurance companies, unions, and
health maintenance organizations. The term includes a person
or entity acting for a pharmacy benefit manager in a
contractual or employment relationship in the performance of
pharmacy benefits benefit management for a managed care
company, nonprofit hospital or medical service organization,
insurance company, or third-party payor.
"(5) PHARMACIST SERVICES. Offering for sale,
compounding, or dispensing of prescriptions, drugs, medicines,
chemicals, or poisons pursuant to a prescription. Pharmacist
services also includes the sale or provision of, counseling
of, or fitting of medical devices, including prosthetics and
durable medical equipment.
"ยง34-23-184.
"(a) The entity conducting an audit shall follow
these procedures:
"(1) The pharmacy contract shall identify and
describe in detail the audit procedures.
"(2) The entity conducting the on-site audit shall
give the pharmacy written notice at least two weeks before
conducting the initial on-site audit for each audit cycle. If
the pharmacy benefit manager does not include their auditing
guidelines within their provider manual, then the notice must
include a documented checklist of all items being audited and
the manual, including the name, date, and edition or volume,
applicable to the audit and auditing guidelines. For on-site
audits a pharmacy benefit manager shall also provide a list of
material that is copied or removed during the course of an
audit to the pharmacy. The pharmacy benefit manager may
document this material on either a checklist or on an audit
acknowledgement form. The pharmacy shall produce any items
during the course of the audit or within 30 days of the
on-site audit.
"(3) The entity conducting the on-site audit may not
interfere with the delivery of pharmacist services to a
patient and shall utilize every effort to minimize
inconvenience and disruption to pharmacy operations during the
audit process.
"(4) An audit that involves clinical or professional
judgment shall be conducted by or in consultation with a
licensed pharmacist.
"(5) The audit shall not consider as fraud any
clerical or record-keeping error, such as a typographical
error, scrivener's error, or computer error regarding a
required document or record; however, such errors may be
subject to recoupment, provided that a pharmacy shall not be
subject to a charge-back or recoupment for a clerical or
record-keeping error in a required document or record,
including a typographical or computer error, unless the error
resulted in overpayment to the pharmacy. The pharmacy shall
have the right to submit amended claims through an online
submission to correct clerical or record-keeping errors in
lieu of recoupment of a claim where no actual financial harm
to the patient or plan has occurred, provided that the
prescription was dispensed according to prescription
documentation requirements set forth by the Alabama Pharmacy
Act and within the plan limits. The pharmacy shall not be
subject to recoupment of funds by the pharmacy benefits
benefit manager unless the pharmacy benefits benefit manager
can provide proof of intent to commit fraud or such error
results in actual financial harm to the pharmacy benefits
benefit manager, a health insurance plan managed by the
pharmacy benefits benefit manager, or a consumer. A person
shall not be subject to criminal penalties for errors provided
for in this subsection without proof of intent to commit
fraud, waste, or abuse.
"a. Any amount to be charged back or recouped due to
overpayment shall not exceed the amount the pharmacy was
overpaid.
"b. The auditing entity shall not include the
dispensing fee in the calculation of an overpayment unless a
prescription is considered a misfill. As used in this
paragraph, misfill means a prescription that was not
dispensed, a prescription in which the prescriber denied the
authorization request, a prescription in which an additional
dispensing fee was charged, or a prescription error, not
including a clerical, record-keeping, typographical, or
computer error.
"(6) An entity conducting an audit shall not require
any documentation that is not required by state and federal
law or Alabama Medicaid. The information shall be considered
to be valid if documented on the prescription, computerized
treatment notes, pharmacy system, or other acceptable medical
records.
"(7) Unless superseded by state or federal law,
auditors shall only have access to previous audit reports on a
particular pharmacy conducted by the auditing entity for the
same pharmacy benefits benefit manager, health plan, or
insurer. An auditing vendor contracting with multiple pharmacy
benefits benefit managers or health insurance plans shall not
use audit reports or other information gained from an audit on
a particular pharmacy to conduct another audit for a different
pharmacy benefits benefit manager or health insurance plan.
"(8) Audit results shall be disclosed to the health
benefit plan in a manner pursuant to contract terms.
"(9) A pharmacy may use the records of a hospital,
physician, or other authorized practitioner of the healing
arts for drugs or medicinal supplies written or transmitted by
any means of communication for the purposes of validating the
pharmacy record with respect to orders or refills of a legend
or narcotic drug.
"(10) If the pharmacy benefit manager or its
representative conducts an audit, the sample size shall not be
greater than 150 prescriptions, provided that a refill does
not constitute a separate prescription for the purposes of
this subdivision.
"(10) (11) Reasonable costs associated with the
audit shall be the responsibility of the auditing entity with
the exception of Alabama Medicaid if the claims sample exceeds
100 unique prescription hard copies.
"(11) (12) A finding of an overpayment or an
underpayment may be a projection based on the number of
patients served having a similar diagnosis or on the number of
similar orders or refills for similar drugs, except that
recoupment shall be based on the actual overpayment or
underpayment of actual claims.
"(12) (13) A finding of an overpayment may not
include the cost of the drugs that were dispensed in
accordance with the prescriber's orders, provided the
prescription was dispensed according to prescription
documentation requirements set forth by the Alabama Pharmacy
Act and within the plan limits. A finding of an overpayment
may not include the dispensing fee amount unless any of the
following apply:
"a. A prescription was not actually dispensed.
"b. The prescriber denied authorization.
"c. The prescription dispensed was a medication
error by the pharmacy.
"d. The identified overpayment is solely based on an
extra dispensing fee.
"(13) (14) Each pharmacy shall be audited under the
same standards and parameters as other similarly situated
pharmacies audited by the entity and must be audited under
rules applicable to the contractor and time period of the
prescription.
"(14) (15) Where not superseded by state or federal
law, the period covered by an audit may not exceed two years
from the date the claim was submitted to or adjudicated by a
managed care company, nonprofit hospital or medical service
organization, health benefit plan, third-party payor, pharmacy
benefit manager, a health program administered by a department
of the state, or any entity that represents those companies,
groups, or department. An audit may not be conducted six
months past the date the pharmacy benefit management plan
terminated its contract to adjudicate claims with a pharmacy
benefit manager, health plan administrator, or any other
entity representing those companies.
"(15) (16) An audit may not be initiated or
scheduled during the first five calendar days of any month.
"(b) The entity shall provide the pharmacy with a
written report of the audit and comply with all of the
following requirements:
"(1) The preliminary audit report shall be delivered
to the pharmacy within 90 days after the conclusion of the
audit, with a reasonable extension to be granted upon request.
"(2) A pharmacy shall be allowed at least 30 days
following receipt of the preliminary audit report in which to
produce documentation to address any discrepancy found during
the audit, with a reasonable extension to be granted upon
request.
"(3) A final audit report shall be delivered to the
pharmacy within 180 days after receipt of the preliminary
audit report or final appeal, as provided for in Section
34-23-185, whichever is later.
"(4) The audit documents shall be signed by the
auditors assigned to the audit. The acknowledgement or receipt
shall be signed by the auditor and the audit report shall
contain clear contact information of the representative of the
auditing organization.
"(5) Recoupments of any disputed funds, or repayment
of funds to the entity by the pharmacy if permitted pursuant
to contractual agreement, shall occur after final internal
disposition of the audit, including the appeals process as set
forth provided for in Section 34-23-185. If the identified
discrepancy for an individual audit exceeds twenty-five
thousand dollars ($25,000), future payments in excess of that
amount to the pharmacy may be withheld pending finalization of
the audit.
"(6) Interest shall not accrue during the audit
period.
"(7) Each entity conducting an audit shall provide a
copy of the final audit report, after completion of any review
process, to the plan sponsor in a manner pursuant to a
contract.
"ยง34-23-185.
"(a) Each entity conducting an audit shall establish
a written appeals process under which a pharmacy may appeal an
unfavorable preliminary audit report to the entity.
"(b) If, following the appeal, Following the appeal,
if the entity finds that an unfavorable audit report or any
portion thereof is unsubstantiated, the entity shall dismiss
the audit report or that portion without the necessity of any
further action.
"(c) If, following the appeal, Following the appeal,
if any of the issues raised in the appeal are not resolved to
the satisfaction of either party, that party may ask for
mediation of those unresolved issues unless other remedies are
granted under the terms of the contract. A certified mediator
shall be chosen by agreement of the parties from the mediators
list maintained by the Alabama Supreme Court. The cost of
mediation shall be borne by agreement of the parties or by the
decision of the mediator.
"ยง34-23-186.
"(a) Notwithstanding any other provision in this
article or state or federal law, the entity conducting the
audit may not use the accounting practice of extrapolation in
calculating recoupments or penalties for audits. An
extrapolation audit means an audit of a sample of prescription
drug benefit claims submitted by a pharmacy to the entity
conducting the audit that is then used to estimate audit
results for a larger batch or group of claims not reviewed by
the auditor. Future fills or refills beyond the current claim
date may not be subject to recoupment due to an assumption of
error under extrapolation procedure. The auditing entity shall
not use extrapolation to calculate penalties or amounts to be
charged back or recouped unless otherwise required by federal
requirements or federal plans.
"(b) The auditing entity conducting a pharmacy audit
shall not compensate an employee or contractor with which an
auditing entity contracts to conduct a pharmacy audit based on
the amount claimed or the actual amount recouped by the
pharmacy being audited."
Section 2. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.