HB73
188446-3
By Representative Farley (N & P)
RFD: Jefferson County Legislation
First Read: 09-JAN-18
PFD: 01/04/2018
ENROLLED, An Act,
Relating to the City of Pleasant Grove in Jefferson
County; to amend Section 45-37A-411 of the Code of Alabama
1975, to further provide for the investment and use of the
proceeds from the sale of the gas and water distribution
systems.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Section 45-37A-411 of the Code of Alabama
1975, is amended to read as follows:
"ยง45-37A-411.
"(a) In the event the Utilities Board of the City of
Pleasant Grove or the City of Pleasant Grove should receive
proceeds from the sale of its gas and water distribution
systems, there shall be established an investment fund named
Pleasant Grove Gas and Water Systems Sale Investment Fund.
This fund shall receive money from other sources in addition
to that received from the sale of the gas and water systems.
"(b) The trust fund shall be invested only in United
States Securities, or in investments secured by an agency of
the United States government. Only 90 percent of the in any
legal investments authorized by state law, including
securities, warrants, bonds, bank accounts, and other
investments that have been declared as legal investments for
publicly held funds. The interest therefrom shall be spent in
the trust fund may be expended or used for any lawful purpose,
unless approved by a vote of two-thirds of the qualified
electors in the City of Pleasant Grove If approved by such
voters, any portion of the aforesaid investment fund,
principal and interest, may be used or spent for lawful
purposes. Up to 10 percent of the principal in the trust fund
may be expended each year for the purchase, repair, and
replacement of municipal infrastructure and equipment. All
expenditures from the fund shall be by resolution or ordinance
of the city council."
Section 2. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.
Speaker of the House of Representatives
President and Presiding Officer of the Senate
House of Representatives
I hereby certify that the within Act originated in
and was passed by the House 20-MAR-18.
Jeff Woodard
Clerk
Senate                27-MAR-18                        Passed