SB34
188047-2
By Senator Ward
RFD: Judiciary
First Read: 09-JAN-18
PFD: 01/02/2018
188047-2:n:11/03/2017:KBH*/tj LSA2017-2890R1
SYNOPSIS:          Under existing law, a mayor is authorized to
remit fines, commute sentences, and pardon a person
found guilty of violating a municipal ordinance but
a mayor cannot reduce court costs. Additionally, a
municipal court judge is authorized to issue arrest
warrants and to punish contempt by imposing fines
or sentences of imprisonment, or both.
This bill would authorize a mayor to remit
court costs and authorize any municipal court judge
to remit fines, court costs, fees, payments, and
other charges in cases where the court determines
that a defendant cannot afford to pay the full
amount that would otherwise be required by law.
This bill would delete the authority of a
mayor to commute sentences.
This bill would clarify that the authority
of the municipal court judge extends to issuing
warrants for the failure of a criminal defendant to
appear in court and that the willful failure of a
defendant to appear may be punishable by contempt,
the sentence for which includes fines and
imprisonment.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
To amend Sections 12-14-15 and 12-14-32 of the Code
of Alabama 1975, relating to the power of mayors to remit
fines and costs and commute sentences imposed by municipal
court judges and the general powers of municipal court judges;
to authorize a mayor to remit court costs; to provide for the
authority of municipal court judges to remit fines, court
costs, or other charges upon a showing of indigency; to delete
the authority of a mayor to commute sentences for violations
of municipal ordinances; and to authorize municipal court
judges to issue arrest warrants and hold an accused in
contempt of court under certain circumstances when the accused
has failed to appear in court.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Sections 12-14-15 and 12-14-32 of the
Code of Alabama 1975, are amended to read as follows:
"ยง12-14-15.
"The mayor, or upon a satisfactory showing of
indigency, the municipal court judge, may remit any or all
fines and such costs as are payable to the municipality and
commute sentences imposed by a municipal court or the court to
which an appeal was taken for violations of municipal
ordinances and, court costs, or other fees, payments, or
charges fixed by law upon the conviction of a defendant for
violations of municipal ordinances. The mayor may also grant
pardons, after conviction, for violation of such ordinances,
and he or she shall report his or her action to the council or
other governing body at the first regular meeting thereof in
the succeeding month with his the reasons therefor in writing.
"ยง12-14-32.
"(a) Municipal judges are authorized to issue arrest
and search warrants for municipal ordinance violations
returnable to the municipal court and for violations of state
law returnable to any state court.
"(b) A municipal judge may also issue a warrant for
the arrest of an accused who fails to appear as required,
after having been released conditioned upon his or her
appearance at a subsequent official proceeding, either with or
without bail or on a judicial public bail, recognizance, or
signature bond, including a bond on electronic traffic and
non-traffic violations. The accused may also be found in
contempt of court for willfully failing to appear as required,
provided that failure to appear as required by a probation
officer as an incident of probation supervision shall not be
punishable by contempt."
Section 2. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.