SB26
189007-1
By Senator Chambliss
RFD: Education and Youth Affairs
First Read: 09-JAN-18
PFD: 12/05/2017
189007-1:n:12/04/2017:KMS/th LSA2017-3631
SYNOPSIS:          Under existing law, juvenile sex offenders
are subject to community notification requirements
based on the risk of re-offense, and if the
juvenile sex offender is a low risk for re-offense,
notification that the juvenile sex offender will be
establishing or has established a fixed residence
shall be provided by local law enforcement to the
principal of the school the juvenile sex offender
will attend after release.
Also, existing law does not prohibit a
juvenile sex offender from attending school with
the general school population.
This bill would require local law
enforcement to notify the local superintendent of
education and the local board of education, in
addition to the principal, when a low-risk juvenile
sex offender is planning to establish or has
established a fixed residence within their
jurisdiction, would require juvenile sex offenders
to notify local law enforcement of any change in
school attendance, and would provide that failure
to comply with either constitutes a Class C felony.
This bill would require the State Board of
Education to develop, and each local board of
education to adopt, a comprehensive model policy
for the supervision and monitoring of low risk
juvenile sex offender students attending school
with the general student population and would
require alternative educational placement for any
juvenile sex offender who is a moderate or high
risk for re-offense.
Amendment 621 of the Constitution of Alabama
of 1901, now appearing as Section 111.05 of the
Official Recompilation of the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, as amended, prohibits a general
law whose purpose or effect would be to require a
new or increased expenditure of local funds from
becoming effective with regard to a local
governmental entity without enactment by a 2/3 vote
unless: it comes within one of a number of
specified exceptions; it is approved by the
affected entity; or the Legislature appropriates
funds, or provides a local source of revenue, to
the entity for the purpose.
The purpose or effect of this bill would be
to require a new or increased expenditure of local
funds within the meaning of the amendment. However,
the bill does not require approval of a local
governmental entity or enactment by a 2/3 vote to
become effective because it comes within one of the
specified exceptions contained in the amendment.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
Relating to juvenile sex offenders; to amend
Sections 15-20A-27, as last amended by Act 2017-414, 2017
Regular Session, and 15-20A-30, Code of Alabama 1975; to
require local law enforcement to notify the local
superintendent of education and the local board of education
when a low-risk juvenile sex offender is planning to establish
or has established a fixed residence within the jurisdiction
of the board; to require juvenile sex offenders to notify
local law enforcement of any change in school attendance; to
further provide that failure to comply, unless otherwise
provided, constitutes a Class C felony; to require the State
Board of Education to develop, and each local board of
education to adopt, a comprehensive model policy for the
supervision and monitoring of low risk juvenile sex offender
students attending school with the general student population;
to require alternative educational placement for any juvenile
sex offender who is a moderate or high risk for re-offense;
and in connection therewith would have as its purpose or
effect the requirement of a new or increased expenditure of
local funds within the meaning of Amendment 621 of the
Constitution of Alabama of 1901, now appearing as Section
111.05 of the Official Recompilation of the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, as amended.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Sections 15-20A-27, as last amended by
Act 2017-414, 2017 Regular Session, and 15-20A-30 of the Code
of Alabama 1975 are amended to read as follows:
"ยง15-20A-27.
"(a) In determining whether to apply notification
requirements to a juvenile sex offender, the sentencing court
shall consider any of the following factors relevant to the
risk of re-offense:
"(1) Conditions of release that minimize the risk of
re-offense, including, but not limited to, whether the
juvenile sex offender is under supervision of probation,
parole, or aftercare; receiving counseling, therapy, or
treatment; or residing in a home situation that provides
guidance and supervision.
"(2) Physical conditions that minimize the risk of
re-offense, including, but not limited to, advanced age or
debilitating illness.
"(3) Criminal history factors indicative of high
risk of re-offense, including whether the conduct of the
juvenile sex offender was found to be characterized by
repetitive and compulsive behavior.
"(4) Whether psychological or psychiatric profiles
indicate a risk of recidivism.
"(5) The relationship between the juvenile sex
offender and the victim.
"(6) The particular facts and circumstances
surrounding the offense.
"(7) The level of planning and participation in the
offense.
"(8) Whether the offense involved the use of a
weapon, violence, or infliction of serious bodily injury.
"(9) The number, date, and nature of prior offenses.
"(10) The response to treatment of the juvenile sex
offender.
"(11) Recent behavior, including behavior while
confined or while under supervision in the community.
"(12) Recent threats against persons or expressions
of intent to commit additional crimes.
"(13) The protection of society.
"(14) Any other factors deemed relevant by the
court.
"(b) If the sentencing court determines that the
juvenile sex offender shall be subject to notification, the
level of notification shall be applied as follows:
"(1) If the risk of re-offense is low, notification
that the juvenile sex offender will be establishing or has
established a fixed residence shall be provided by local law
enforcement to the principal of the public or nonpublic school
where the juvenile sex offender will attend after release and,
if a public school, to the local superintendent of education
and local board of education with jurisdiction over that
school. This notification shall include the name, actual
living address, date of birth of the juvenile sex offender,
and a statement of the sex offense for which he or she has
been adjudicated delinquent, including the age and gender of
the victim. This information shall be considered confidential
by the school, the superintendent, and each member of the
local board of education and be shared only with the teachers
and staff with supervision over the juvenile sex offender.
Whoever, except as specifically provided herein, directly or
indirectly discloses or makes use of or knowingly permits the
use of information concerning a juvenile sex offender
described in this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be
guilty of a Class C felony within the jurisdiction of the
juvenile court.
"(2) If the risk of re-offense is moderate,
notification that the juvenile sex offender will be
establishing, or has established, a fixed residence shall be
provided by local law enforcement to all schools and childcare
facilities within three miles of the declared fixed residence
of the juvenile sex offender. A community notification flyer
shall be mailed by regular mail or hand delivered to all
schools or childcare facilities as required by this
subsection. No other method may be used to disseminate this
information.
"(3) If the risk of re-offense is high, the public
shall receive notification as though the juvenile sex offender
were an adult sex offender in accordance with Section
15-20A-21.
"(c) The sentencing court shall enter an order
stating whether the juvenile sex offender shall be subject to
notification and the level of notification that shall be
applied. The court shall provide a copy of the order to the
prosecuting attorney and to the Alabama State Law Enforcement
Agency.
"(d) The determination of notification by the
sentencing court shall not be subject to appeal.
"(e) Except as otherwise provided by law, any
violation of this section is a Class C felony.
"ยง15-20A-30.
"(a) Immediately upon release or immediately upon
adjudication of delinquency if the juvenile sex offender is
not committed, the juvenile sex offender and the parent,
custodian, or guardian shall register all required
registration information with local law enforcement in each
county in which the juvenile sex offender resides or intends
to reside.
"(b) Whenever a juvenile sex offender establishes a
new residence, the juvenile sex offender and the parent,
custodian, or guardian of the juvenile sex offender shall
immediately appear in person to register all required
registration information with local law enforcement in each
county of residence.
"(c) If the parent, custodian, or guardian of a
juvenile sex offender transfers or terminates the residence of
the juvenile sex offender, or the custody of the juvenile sex
offender is changed to a different parent, custodian, or
guardian resulting in a transfer of residence, the original
parent, custodian, or guardian with custody shall immediately
notify local law enforcement in each county of residence.
"(d) Whenever a juvenile sex offender changes any
required registration information including, but not limited
to, his or her school attendance status, the juvenile sex
offender and the parent, custodian, or guardian of the
juvenile sex offender shall immediately appear in person to
update the required registration information with local law
enforcement in each county in which the juvenile sex offender
resides.
"(e) A juvenile sex offender required to register
for life pursuant to Section 15-20A-28 shall appear in person
with his or her parent, custodian, or guardian to verify all
required registration information during the birth month of
the juvenile sex offender and every three months thereafter
with the local law enforcement in each county of residence
unless the juvenile sex offender has been relieved from
registration requirements pursuant to Section 15-20A-34.
"(f) A juvenile sex offender required to register
for 10 years pursuant to Section 15-20A-28 shall appear in
person with his or her parent, custodian, or guardian to
verify all required registration information during the birth
month of the juvenile sex offender and every year thereafter
with local law enforcement in each county of residence unless
the juvenile sex offender has been relieved from registration
requirements pursuant to Section 15-20A-24.
"(g) At the time of registration, the juvenile sex
offender shall be provided a form explaining all duties and
any restrictions placed on the juvenile sex offender. The
juvenile sex offender and the parent, custodian, or guardian
of the juvenile sex offender shall read and sign this form
stating that he or she understands the duties and restrictions
placed on the juvenile sex offender and his or her parent,
custodian, or guardian.
"(h) When a juvenile sex offender becomes the age of
majority, the parent, custodian, or guardian of the juvenile
sex offender shall no longer be subject to the requirements of
this section, and the juvenile sex offender shall instead be
solely responsible for the requirements in this section.
"(i) A person who knowingly violates this section
shall be guilty of a Class C felony."
Section 2. (a)(1) On or before January 1, 2019, the
State Board of Education shall develop a comprehensive model
policy for the supervision and monitoring of juvenile sex
offender students, who have a low risk of re-offense and are
enrolled, attending class, and participating in school
activities with the general population of students. The
purpose of the model policy is to provide a safe and secure
environment for all students and staff. The model policy shall
be adopted by each local board of education and implemented
beginning with the 2020-2021 school year. The model policy, at
a minimum, shall contain all of the following components:
a. Application to all school property and
school-sponsored functions including, but not limited to,
classroom instructional time, assemblies, athletic events,
extracurricular activities, and school bus transportation.
b. An initial meeting of all parties immediately
upon the enrollment of the low risk juvenile sex offender, and
frequent meetings thereafter as necessary to provide for the
continual monitoring of the student and a safe school
environment for all. The principal and all appropriate school
personnel who have received confidential notification pursuant
to subdivision (1) of subsection (b) of Section 15-20A-27,
Code of Alabama 1975, in consultation with juvenile probation
professionals, shall meet with the student, and the parent or
guardian of the student, to create and implement an
individualized student safety plan. The principal shall
determine other appropriate school personnel to be included in
the meetings to assist in defining school expectations.
Student safety plans shall outline the responsibilities of all
parties in safely managing the behavior of the student and
protecting all students. The plan shall be consistent with
existing disciplinary policies and procedures, student conduct
policies, and mandatory reporting policies. Student safety
plans shall include, but not be limited to, all of the
following:
1. An outline of conditions or limitations, or both,
on the low risk juvenile sex offender concerning his or her
interactions on school property and when participating in
school activities.
2. An effective procedure, developed in conjunction
with school staff in consultation with the parent or guardian
of the student, for communicating concerns relating to the
student.
3. Guidelines for expected intervention actions for
high-risk behaviors and for reinforcing positive behaviors
based on the needs of the student and the safety of all
students and staff.
4. Procedures for the continual review of each plan
by staff designated by the principal and for monitoring and
changing the plan on an as-needed basis by school staff.
5. Safeguards for protecting confidential
information.
c. Continuity of information and monitoring of
low-risk juvenile sex offender students over time as the
students change schools and as administrators and school
personnel change.
d. Comprehensive training for school personnel on
recognizing behavior that may be indicative of improper sexual
activity and taking appropriate action upon noticing an
increase or escalation of those behaviors in a low risk
juvenile sex offender student, both for the short and
long-term safety of that student and all other students.
e. Detailed procedures for reporting behavior that
may be indicative of improper sexual activity to the
principal, or his or her designee, and to appropriate law
enforcement or other involved agencies upon a determination
that the low risk juvenile sex offender student has not
complied with the student safety plan. School personnel shall
report violations of plan expectations to the principal when
they occur.
(2) When a low risk juvenile sex offender student
changes schools, the principal shall notify local law
enforcement and local law enforcement shall notify the
principal of the new school and, where applicable, the local
superintendent of education and local board of education
pursuant to subsection (b) of Section 15-20A-27, Code of
Alabama 1975. The principal of the prior school shall ensure
that all records and safety plans pertaining to the low risk
juvenile sex offender student follow the student to his or her
new school. If the sex offender status or probation or parole
status of the student changes, the principal shall notify the
appropriate school staff as part of the safety planning of the
school. The principal and school staff shall maintain
confidentiality regarding these students as required by law.
Any information received by a principal, school personnel,
local superintendent of education, or local board of education
member as a result of a notification is confidential and may
not be further disseminated except as provided in Section
15-20A-27, Code of Alabama 1975, and other state law and the
Family and Educational and Privacy Rights Act of 1994, 20 U.S.
Code Section 1232g et. seq. Any school district employee who
releases information in compliance with state and federal law
is immune from civil liability for damages unless it is shown
that the school district or district employee acted with gross
negligence or in bad faith.
(b)(1) The Legislature finds that a juvenile sex
offender who is classified as having either a moderate or high
risk of re-offense poses a potential threat to the safety of
other students and teachers that is detrimental to the
educational process and not in the best interests of the other
students.
(2) A juvenile sex offender who is classified as
having either a moderate or high risk of re-offense may not
attend school with the general population of students. The
applicable local board of education, in consultation with
local law enforcement, shall assist the parent or guardian of
the moderate or high risk juvenile sex offender student in
determining the appropriate alternative educational placement
of the student. An appropriate alternative educational
placement may include, and may not be limited to, an
alternative education program, home school, or virtual school
pursuant to Chapter 46A of Title 16, Code of Alabama 1975.
(3) Any alternative placement of a student with a
disability who receives special education services shall be
made in compliance with the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act, 20 U.S.C. Section 1400 et seq.
(c) A student who is enrolled in and attending
school through an alternative educational placement under this
section shall be included in enrollment and attendance counts
of students of the local school system in which the student
resides as otherwise provided by law for that alternative
educational placement and data shall be reported to the local
school system of residence in a timely manner as otherwise
provided by law. The State Board of Education, by rule, may
provide for payment by the parent or guardian of a juvenile
sex offender who is classified as having either a moderate or
high risk of re-offense, of any costs associated with
alternative placement, as appropriate.
Section 3. Although this bill would have as its
purpose or effect the requirement of a new or increased
expenditure of local funds, the bill is excluded from further
requirements and application under Amendment 621, now
appearing as Section 111.05 of the Official Recompilation of
the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as amended, because the
bill defines a new crime or amends the definition of an
existing crime.
Section 4. This act shall become effective on the
first day of the third month following its passage and
approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.