HB454
192137-1
By Representatives McMillan, Faust, Shiver, Baker, Davis and
Jackson (Constitutional Amendment)
RFD: Baldwin County Legislation
First Read: 27-FEB-18
192137-1:n:02/27/2018:JKS/bm LSA2018-931
SYNOPSIS:           This bill would propose an amendment to the
Constitution of Alabama of 1901, relating to
Baldwin County, to prohibit a person from owning or
operating or installing, creating, building, or
fabricating a motor vehicle, aircraft, or vessel
with a false or secret compartment used to
unlawfully conceal contraband or controlled
substances; to provide criminal penalties and
property forfeiture for violations.
A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
To propose an amendment to the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, relating to Baldwin County, to prohibit a
person from owning or operating or installing, creating,
building, or fabricating a motor vehicle, aircraft, or vessel
with a false or secret compartment used to unlawfully conceal
contraband or controlled substances; to provide criminal
penalties and property forfeiture for violations.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. The following amendment to the
Constitution of Alabama of 1901, is proposed and shall become
valid as a part of the Constitution when all requirements of
this act are fulfilled:
PROPOSED AMENDMENT
(a) This amendment shall only apply in Baldwin
County.
(b) As used in this amendment, the following words
have the following meanings:
(1) AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance now known, or
hereafter invented, used, or designed for navigation of or
flight through the air and used privately or commercially.
(2) FALSE OR SECRET COMPARTMENT. An enclosure
integrated into a motor vehicle, aircraft, or vessel, that is
a modification of the motor vehicle, aircraft, or vessel, as
originally manufactured used to conceal or hide an illegal
object or objects.
(3) MOTOR VEHICLE. A self-propelled vehicle intended
primarily for use and operation on public roads and highways.
(4) VESSEL. Every description of watercraft capable
of being used as a means of transportation on the water.
(c) (1) A person may not knowingly or intentionally
own or operate a motor vehicle, aircraft, or vessel containing
a false or secret compartment that is used or has been used to
conceal a controlled substance prohibited by Chapter 2, Title
20, Code of Alabama 1975, an object that is illegal to posses,
or other contraband.
(2) A person may not install, create, build, or
fabricate a false or secret compartment in a motor vehicle,
aircraft, or vessel that he or she or another person intends
to use to conceal a controlled substance prohibited by Chapter
2, Title 20, Code of Alabama 1975, an object that is illegal
to possess, or other contraband.
(d) For the purposes of this section, a new owner of
a motor vehicle, aircraft, or vessel is not criminally liable
for any conduct in violation of subsection (b) which occurred
prior to the transfer of title of the vehicle, aircraft, or
vessel, provided he or she had no knowledge of the conduct and
takes steps to change the motor vehicle, aircraft, or vessel
back to its original design when made aware of the
modification in violation of this amendment.
(e) Notwithstanding Section 104, the Legislature may
provide penalties for violations of this amendment by local
law.
(f) A motor vehicle, aircraft, or vessel containing
a false or secret compartment used in violation of this
amendment, as well as any items in the compartment, are
subject to seizure by a state or local law enforcement officer
with jurisdiction over the property. The procedures for
forfeiture and the disposition of the property and any
proceeds shall be subject to Article 4, Chapter 5, Title 15,
Code of Alabama 1975.
Section 2. An election upon the proposed amendment
shall be held in accordance with Sections 284 and 284.01 of
the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, now appearing as Sections
284 and 284.01 of the Official Recompilation of the
Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as amended, and the election
laws of this state.
Section 3. The appropriate election official shall
assign a ballot number for the proposed constitutional
amendment on the election ballot and shall set forth the
following description of the substance or subject matter of
the proposed constitutional amendment:
"Relating to Baldwin County, proposing an amendment
to the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, to prohibit a person
from owning or operating or installing, creating, building, or
fabricating a motor vehicle, aircraft, or vessel with a false
or secret compartment used to unlawfully conceal contraband or
controlled substances; to provide criminal penalties and
property forfeiture for violations.
"Proposed by Act _________"
This description shall be followed by the following
language:
"Yes ( ) No ( )."