CONCERNING
SATISFIED FOR A PROVISION OF LAW GOVERNING THE
DISCLOSURE OF COMMUNICATIONS WITH MENTAL HEALTH
PROFESSIONALS TO TAKE EFFECT.
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Colorado:
SECTION 1. Legislative declaration. (1) The general assembly
finds that:
(a) In 2016, the general assembly enacted, and the governor
signed into law, House Bill 16-1063, which allows mental health
professionals to disclose to school and school district personnel and law
enforcement agencies communications with a client if the client makes
statements or exhibits behaviors that create an articulable and significant
threat against a school or its occupants;
(b) Given concerns that the legislation conflicted with the privacy
rule under the federal "Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act of 1996" (HIPAA) and required a waiver from the privacy rule, the
effect of the legislation was made contingent on receipt from the secretary
of the federal department of health and human services (HHS) of an
exception to the HIPAA privacy rule;
(c) As directed by the legislation, in June 2016 the executive
director of the department of human services submitted an application to
the secretary of HHS for an exception for a provision of state law, House
Bill 16-1063, from preemption under federal regulations 45 CFR 164;
(d) By letter dated October 19, 2016, the director of the office for
civil rights in the HHS, on behalf of the secretary of HHS, notified the
HIPAA privacy and security officer for the department of human services
that the office for civil rights determined that the provisions of House Bill
16-1063 regarding disclosure of information for warning of threats to
public safety are not contrary to the HIPAA privacy rule and thus do not
qualify for an exception;
(e) The letter from the office for civil rights further stated that
"Colorado covered entities can comply with House Bill 16-1063 while
also complying with the requirements of the Privacy Rule"; and
(f)   Since the federal government has determined that the
provisions of House Bill 16-1063 do not conflict with the HIPAA privacy
rule, the contingency provision in House Bill 16-1063 is no longer
necessary and should therefore be repealed.
SECTION 2. In Colorado Revised Statutes, 12-43-218, repeal
(2)(d)(VI) as follows:
12-43-218.     Disclosure of confidential communications -
definitions. (2) Subsection (1) of this section does not apply when:
(d) (VI) (A) This paragraph (d) takes effect only if, in accordance
with section 26-1-140, C.R.S., the department of human services applies
for and is granted an exception to the privacy rule under HIPAA.
(B) This subparagraph (VI) is repealed if the secretary of the
federal department of health and human services grants the exception to
the privacy rule under HIPAA. The executive director of the department
of human services shall notify the revisor of statutes in writing if the
condition specified in this sub-subparagraph (B) occurs.
(C) This paragraph (d) is repealed if the secretary of the federal
department of health and human services denies the request for an
exception to the privacy rule under HIPAA. The executive director of the
department of human services shall notify the revisor of statutes in
writing if the condition specified in this sub-subparagraph (C) occurs.
SECTION 3. Safety clause. The general assembly hereby finds,
determines, and declares that this act is necessary for the immediate
preservation of the public peace, health, and safety.