                     GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF NORTH CAROLINA
                                 SESSION 2017

                                   SESSION LAW 2017-173
                                      HOUSE BILL 800


AN ACT TO MAKE VARIOUS CHANGES TO THE LAWS AFFECTING CHARTER
  SCHOOLS.

The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts:

PART I. ALLOW EMPLOYEES OF EDUCATION OR CHARTER MANAGEMENT
ORGANIZATIONS TO SERVE AS TEACHERS
        SECTION 1. G.S. 115C-218.90(a)(1) reads as rewritten:
        "(1) An employee of a charter school is not an employee of the local school
             administrative unit in which the charter school is located. The charter
             school's board of directors shall employ and contract with necessary teachers
             or contract with an education management organization or charter
             management organization to employ and provide teachers to perform the
             particular service for which they are employed in the school; at least fifty
             percent (50%) of these teachers shall hold teacher licenses. All teachers who
             are teaching in the core subject areas of mathematics, science, social studies,
             and language arts shall be college graduates.
                 The board also may employ necessary employees who are not required
             to hold teacher licenses to perform duties other than teaching and may
             contract for other services. The board may discharge teachers and
             nonlicensed employees."

PART II. MODIFY THE DECISION TIME LINE FOR THE CHARTER SCHOOL
FAST-TRACK REPLICATION APPLICATION PROCESS
            SECTION 2.(a) Section 6.5 of S.L. 2014-101, as amended by Section 2 of S.L.
2016-79, reads as rewritten:
    "SECTION 6.5. Upon recommendations by the Office of Charter Schools and the Charter
Schools Advisory Board, the State Board of Education shall adopt a process and rules for
fast-track replication of high-quality charter schools currently operating in the State. The State
Board of Education shall not require a planning year for applicants selected through the
fast-track replication process. In addition to the requirements for charter applicants set forth in
Part 6A of Article 16 of Chapter 115C of the General Statutes, the fast-track replication process
adopted by the State Board of Education shall, at a minimum, require a board of directors of a
charter school to demonstrate one of the following in order to qualify for fast-track replication:
            (1)     A charter school in this State governed by the board of directors has student
                    academic outcomes that are comparable to the academic outcomes of
                    students in the local school administrative unit in which the charter school is
                    located and can provide three years of financially sound audits.
            (2)     The board of directors agrees to contract with an education management
                    organization or charter management organization that can demonstrate that it
                    can replicate high-quality charter schools in the State that have proven
                    student academic success and financial soundness.


                                      *H800-v-7*
The State Board of Education shall ensure that the rules for a fast-track replication process
provide that decisions by the State Board of Education on whether to grant a charter through
the replication process are completed in less than 120 days from the application submission
date. The State Board shall provide a decision no later than October 15 of the year immediately
preceding the year of the proposed school opening. The State Board of Education shall adopt
rules and procedures required by this section within 90 days of the effective date of this act, and
report to the Joint Legislative Education Oversight Committee within 120 days of the effective
date of this act."
            SECTION 2.(b) This section is effective the date this act becomes law and applies
beginning with applications submitted for fast-track replication of schools opening in the
2018-2019 school year.

PART III. EXPANSION OF GROWTH EXCEPTION FOR MATERIAL REVISIONS
OF CHARTERS
            SECTION 3.(a) G.S. 115C-218.7(b) reads as rewritten:
    "(b) Enrollment growth of greater than twenty percent (20%) shall be considered a
material revision of the charter.charter if the charter is currently identified as low-performing.
The State Board shall not approve a material revision for enrollment growth of greater than
twenty percent (20%) for a charter that is currently identified as low-performing. Enrollment
growth of greater than twenty-five percent (25%) shall be considered a material revision of the
charter for any charter school that is not identified as low-performing. The State Board may
approve such additional enrollment growth of greater than twenty percent (20%) twenty-five
percent (25%) only if it finds all of the following:
            (1)    The actual enrollment of the charter school is within ten percent (10%) of its
                   maximum authorized enrollment.
            (2)    The charter school has commitments for ninety percent (90%) of the
                   requested maximum growth.
            (3)    The charter school is not currently identified as low-performing.
            (4)    The charter school meets generally accepted standards of fiscal management.
            (5)    The charter school is, at the time of the request for the enrollment increase,
                   substantially in compliance with State law, federal law, the charter school's
                   own bylaws, and the provisions set forth in its charter granted by the State
                   Board."
            SECTION 3.(b) G.S. 115C-218.8 reads as rewritten:
"§ 115C-218.8. Nonmaterial revisions of charters.
    It shall not be considered a material revision of a charter and shall not require prior
approval of the State Board for a charter school to do any of the following:
            (1)    Increase its enrollment during the charter school's second year of operation
                   and annually thereafter by up to twenty percent (20%) of the school's
                   previous year's enrollment.in accordance with G.S. 115C-218.7(b).
            (2)    Increase its enrollment during the charter school's second year of operation
                   and annually thereafter in accordance with planned growth as authorized in
                   its charter.
            (3)    Expand to offer one grade higher or lower than the charter school currently
                   offers if the charter school has (i) operated for at least three years, (ii) has
                   not been identified as continually low-performing as provided in
                   G.S. 115C-218.94, and (iii) has been in financial compliance as required by
                   the State Board."
            SECTION 3.(c) G.S. 115C-218.7(b), as amended by Section 3(a) of this act, reads
as rewritten:


Page 2                                Session Law 2017-173                         House Bill 800
    "(b) Enrollment growth of greater than twenty percent (20%) shall be considered a
material revision of the charter if the charter is currently identified as low-performing. The
State Board shall not approve a material revision for enrollment growth of greater than twenty
percent (20%) for a charter that is currently identified as low-performing. Enrollment growth of
greater than twenty-five percent (25%) thirty percent (30%) shall be considered a material
revision of the charter for any charter school that is not identified as low-performing. The State
Board may approve such additional enrollment growth of greater than twenty-five percent
(25%) thirty percent (30%) only if it finds all of the following:
             (1)    The actual enrollment of the charter school is within ten percent (10%) of its
                    maximum authorized enrollment.
             (2)    The charter school has commitments for ninety percent (90%) of the
                    requested maximum growth.
             (3)    The charter school is not currently identified as low-performing.
             (4)    The charter school meets generally accepted standards of fiscal management.
             (5)    The charter school is, at the time of the request for the enrollment increase,
                    substantially in compliance with State law, federal law, the charter school's
                    own bylaws, and the provisions set forth in its charter granted by the State
                    Board."
             SECTION 3.(d) Subsections (a), (b), and (d) of this section are effective when this
act becomes law and applies to approvals for material changes on or after that date. Subsection
(c) of this section is effective July 1, 2018, and applies to approvals for material changes on or
after that date.

PART IV. ENROLLMENT PRIORITIES FOR STUDENTS PREVIOUSLY
ENROLLED IN CHARTERS
       SECTION 4. G.S. 115C-218.45(f) reads as rewritten:
  "(f) The charter school may give enrollment priority to any of the following:
       (1)    Siblings of currently enrolled students who were admitted to the charter
              school in a previous year. For the purposes of this section, the term
              "siblings" includes any of the following who reside in the same household:
              half siblings, stepsiblings, and children residing in a family foster home.
       (2)    Siblings of students who have completed the highest grade level offered by
              that school and who were enrolled in at least four grade levels offered by the
              charter school or, if less than four grades are offered, in the maximum
              number of grades offered by the charter school.
       (3)    Limited to no more than fifteen percent (15%) of the school's total
              enrollment, unless granted a waiver by the State Board of Education, the
              following:
              a.      Children of the school's full-time employees.
              b.      Children of the charter school's board of directors.
       (4)    A student who was enrolled in the charter school within the two previous
              school years but left the school (i) to participate in an academic study abroad
              program or a competitive admission residential program or (ii) because of
              the vocational opportunities of the student's parent.
       (5)    A student who was enrolled in another charter school in the State in the
              previous school year that does not offer the student's next grade level.
       (6)    A student who was enrolled in another charter school in the State in the
              previous school year that does not offer the student's next grade level and
              both of the charter schools have an enrollment articulation agreement to
              accept students or are governed by the same board of directors.


House Bill 800                        Session Law 2017-173                                 Page 3
           (7)    A student who was enrolled in another charter school in the State in the
                  previous school year."

PART V. CHARTER SCHOOLS AND NC PRE-K
           SECTION 5.(a) G.S. 115C-218(c)(3) reads as rewritten:
           "(3) Powers and duties. – The Office of Charter Schools shall have the following
                  powers and duties:
                  a.      Serve as staff to the Advisory Board and fulfill any task and duties
                          assigned to it by the Advisory Board.
                  b.      Provide technical assistance and guidance to charter schools
                          operating within the State.
                  c.      Provide technical assistance and guidance to nonprofit corporations
                          seeking to operate charter schools within the State.
                  d.      Provide or arrange for training for charter schools that have received
                          preliminary approval from the State Board.
                  e.      Assist approved charter schools and charter schools seeking approval
                          from the State Board in coordinating services with the Department of
                          Public Instruction.
                  e1.     Assist certain charter schools seeking to participate in the NC
                          prekindergarten program in accordance with G.S. 115C-218.115.
                  f.      Other duties as assigned by the State Board."
           SECTION 5.(b) G.S. 115C-218.45(f), as amended by Section 4 of this act, reads as
rewritten:
   "(f)    The charter school may give enrollment priority to any of the following:
           (1)    Siblings of currently enrolled students who were admitted to the charter
                  school in a previous year. For the purposes of this section, the term
                  "siblings" includes any of the following who reside in the same household:
                  half siblings, stepsiblings, and children residing in a family foster home.
           (2)    Siblings of students who have completed the highest grade level offered by
                  that school and who were enrolled in at least four grade levels offered by the
                  charter school or, if less than four grades are offered, in the maximum
                  number of grades offered by the charter school.
           (2a) A student who was enrolled in a preschool program operated by the charter
                  school in the prior year.
           (3)    Limited to no more than fifteen percent (15%) of the school's total
                  enrollment, unless granted a waiver by the State Board of Education, the
                  following:
                  a.      Children of the school's full-time employees.
                  b.      Children of the charter school's board of directors.
           (4)    A student who was enrolled in the charter school within the two previous
                  school years but left the school (i) to participate in an academic study abroad
                  program or a competitive admission residential program or (ii) because of
                  the vocational opportunities of the student's parent.
           (5)    A student who was enrolled in another charter school in the State in the
                  previous school year that does not offer the student's next grade level.
           (6)    A student who was enrolled in another charter school in the State in the
                  previous school year that does not offer the student's next grade level and
                  both of the charter schools have an enrollment articulation agreement to
                  accept students or are governed by the same board of directors.
           (7)    A student who was enrolled in another charter school in the State in the
                  previous school year."

Page 4                               Session Law 2017-173                        House Bill 800
           SECTION 5.(c) Article 14A of Chapter 115C of the General Statutes is amended
by adding a new section to read:
"§ 115C-218.115. Operation of NC Pre-K programs.
    (a)    A charter school may apply to a local contracting agency to participate in the NC
prekindergarten (NC Pre-K) program as a local program site offering families a high-quality
prekindergarten experience. A charter school that seeks to operate as a NC Pre-K program site
may request administrative and technical assistance from the Office of Charter Schools with its
application to the local contracting agency if the charter school meets all of the following:
           (1)      The charter school has operated as a charter school for at least three school
                    years.
           (2)      The charter school is not currently identified as low-performing.
           (3)      The charter school meets generally accepted standards of fiscal management.
           (4)      The charter school is substantially in compliance with State law, federal law,
                    the charter school's own bylaws, and the provisions set forth in its charter
                    granted by the State Board.
    (b)    The Office of Charter Schools, in consultation with the Department of Health and
Human Services, Division of Child Development and Early Education, shall assist a charter
school under subsection (a) of this section with determining whether the charter school's
proposed program meets (i) the building standards set forth in subsection (c) of this section and
any other State standards for the charter school to be licensed as a child care facility and (ii) the
standards required to be selected as a site under the NC Pre-K program. If the charter school
does not meet these standards, the Office of Charter Schools shall provide assistance to the
charter school in identifying any obstacles to its participation in the NC Pre-K program.
    (c)    A charter school that otherwise meets all of the requirements for a child care facility
license may use an existing or newly constructed classroom in the charter school for three- and
four-year-old preschool students without modifications to the classroom or building if the
classroom meets all of the following:
           (1)      Has at least one toilet and one sink for hand washing.
           (2)      Meets kindergarten standards for overhead light fixtures.
           (3)      Meets kindergarten standards for floors, walls, and ceilings.
           (4)      Has floors, walls, and ceilings that are free from mold, mildew, and lead
                    hazards."

PART VI. NORTH CAROLINA VIRTUAL PUBLIC SCHOOL
            SECTION 6.(a) Section 7.22(h) of S.L. 2011-145, as amended by Section 88 of
S.L. 2014-115, reads as rewritten:
    "SECTION 7.22.(h) Beginning in 2011, the Director of NCVPS shall submit an annual
report on NCVPS to the State Board of Education no later than December 15 of each year. The
report shall use data from the previous fiscal year and shall include statistics on actual versus
projected costs to local school administrative units and charter schools, student enrollment,
virtual teacher salaries, and measures of academic achievement.
            The Director of NCVPS shall continue to ensure the following:
            (1)     Course quality standards are established and met.met for courses developed
                    by NCVPS.
            (2)     All e-learning opportunities other than virtual charter schools offered by
                    State-funded entities to public school students are consolidated under the
                    NCVPS program, eliminating course duplication.
            (3)     All courses offered through NCVPS are aligned to the North Carolina
                    Standard Course of Study."



House Bill 800                         Session Law 2017-173                                   Page 5
           SECTION 6.(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, local school
administrative units may partner with eligible providers other than the North Carolina Virtual
Public School for e-learning opportunities. Eligible providers shall meet all of the following:
           (1)     Be accredited by a regional accrediting agency such as, but not limited to,
                   AdvancEd or the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools (SACS).
           (2)     Employ teachers who hold teaching licenses from states that participate in
                   the NASDTEC Educator Identification Clearinghouse.
           (3)     Ensure that courses offered to North Carolina students are aligned to the
                   North Carolina Standard Course of Study.
           SECTION 6.(c) This section is effective when it becomes law.

PART VII. REORGANIZE STATUTE ON STATE AND LOCAL FUNDS
             SECTION 7. G.S. 115C-218.105(b) reads as rewritten:
    "(b) Funds allocated by the State Board of Education may be used to enter into
operational and financing leases for real property or mobile classroom units for use as school
facilities for charter schools and may be used for payments on loans made to charter schools for
facilities, equipment, or operations. However, State funds shall not be used to obtain any other
interest in real property or mobile classroom units. The school also may own land and buildings
it obtains through non-State sources. No indebtedness of any kind incurred or created by the
charter school shall constitute an indebtedness of the State or its political subdivisions, and no
indebtedness of the charter school shall involve or be secured by the faith, credit, or taxing
power of the State or its political subdivisions. Every contract or lease into which a charter
school enters shall include the previous sentence. The school also may own land and buildings
it obtains through non-State sources."

PART VIII. EFFECTIVE DATE
        SECTION 8. Except as otherwise provided, this act is effective when it becomes
law.
        In the General Assembly read three times and ratified this the 29th day of June,
2017.


                                           s/ Daniel J. Forest
                                              President of the Senate


                                           s/ Tim Moore
                                              Speaker of the House of Representatives


                                           s/ Roy Cooper
                                              Governor


Approved 11:47 a.m. this 21st day of July, 2017




Page 6                                Session Law 2017-173                        House Bill 800
