                     GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF NORTH CAROLINA
                                 SESSION 2017

                                    SESSION LAW 2018-114
                                       HOUSE BILL 374


AN ACT TO PROVIDE FURTHER REGULATORY RELIEF TO THE CITIZENS OF NORTH
  CAROLINA.

The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts:

ELECTRONIC DELIVERY OF DECISION DOCUMENTS IN CONTESTED CASES
             SECTION 1. G.S. 150B-23 reads as rewritten:
"§ 150B-23. Commencement; assignment of administrative law judge; hearing required;
             notice; intervention.
     …
     (f)     Unless another statute or a federal statute or regulation sets a time limitation for the
filing of a petition in contested cases against a specified agency, the general limitation for the
filing of a petition in a contested case is 60 days. The time limitation, whether established by
another statute, federal statute, or federal regulation, or this section, shall commence when notice
is given of the agency decision to all persons aggrieved who are known to the agency by personal
delivery delivery, electronic delivery, or by the placing of the notice in an official depository of
the United States Postal Service wrapped in a wrapper addressed to the person at the latest address
given by the person to the agency. The notice shall be in writing, and shall set forth the agency
action, and shall inform the persons of the right, the procedure, and the time limit to file a
contested case petition. When no informal settlement request has been received by the agency
prior to issuance of the notice, any subsequent informal settlement request shall not suspend the
time limitation for the filing of a petition for a contested case hearing.
     …."

ALLOW TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS TO OPERATE FOR UP TO 30
DAYS AND OPERATE AT AGRITOURISM BUSINESSES
           SECTION 2. G.S. 130A-247 reads as rewritten:
"§ 130A-247. Definitions.
    The following definitions shall apply throughout this Part:
           …
           (8)    "Temporary food establishment" means an establishment not otherwise
                  exempted from this part pursuant to G.S. 130A-250 that (i) prepares or serves
                  food, (ii) operates for a period of time not to exceed 21 30 days in one location,
                  and (iii) is affiliated with and endorsed by a transitory fair, carnival, circus,
                  festival, or public exhibition.public exhibition, or agritourism business. For
                  purposes of this subdivision, "agritourism" means the same as in
                  G.S. 153A-340(b)(2a). Notwithstanding the time limit set out in this
                  subdivision, a local health department may, upon the request of a temporary
                  food establishment, grant a one-time, 15-day extension of the establishment's
                  permit if the establishment continues to meet all of the requirements of its
                  permit and applicable rules."



                                      *H374-v-6*
CHANGE REQUIRED OFFICE LOCATION FOR THE NORTH CAROLINA BOARD
OF COSMETIC ART EXAMINERS FROM RALEIGH TO WAKE COUNTY
       SECTION 3. G.S. 88B-6(a) reads as rewritten:
  "(a) The Board shall maintain its office in Raleigh,Wake County, North Carolina."

AMEND LAW ON CONTRACTS WITH AUTOMATIC RENEWAL CLAUSES
             SECTION 4.(a) G.S. 75-41 reads as rewritten:
"§ 75-41. Contracts with automatic renewal clauses.
    (a)      Any person engaged in commerce that sells, leases, or offers to sell or lease, any
products or services to a consumer pursuant to a contract, where the contract automatically
renews unless the consumer cancels the contract, shall do all of the following:
             (1)     Disclose the automatic renewal clause clearly and conspicuously in the
                     contract or contract offer.
             (2)     Disclose clearly and conspicuously how to cancel the contract in the initial
                     contract, contract offer, or with delivery of products or services.
             (3)     For any automatic renewal exceeding 60 days, provide written notice to the
                     consumer by personal delivery, electronic mail, or first-class mail, at least 15
                     days but no earlier than 45 days before the date the contract is to be
                     automatically renewed, stating the date on which the contract is scheduled to
                     automatically renew and notifying the consumer that the contract will
                     automatically renew unless it is cancelled by the consumer prior to that date.
             (4)     If the terms of the contract will change upon the automatic renewal of the
                     contract, disclose the changing terms of the contract clearly and conspicuously
                     on the notification in at least 12 point type and in bold print.
    (b)      Repealed by Session Laws 2016-113, s. 16(a), effective July 26, 2016, and applicable
to contracts entered into on or after that date.
    (c)      A person that fails to comply with the requirements of this section is in violation of
this section unless the person demonstrates that all of the following are its routine business
practice:
             (1)     The person has established and implemented written procedures to comply
                     with this section and enforces compliance with the procedures.
             (2)     Any failure to comply with this section is the result of error.
             (3)     Where an error has caused the failure to comply with this section, the person
                     provides a full refund or credit for all amounts billed to or paid by the
                     consumer from the date of the renewal until the date of the termination of the
                     contract, or the date of the subsequent notice of renewal, whichever occurs
                     first.
    (d)      This section does not apply to insurers licensed under Chapter 58 of the General
Statutes, or to banks, trust companies, savings and loan associations, savings banks, or credit
unions licensed or organized under the laws of any state or the United States, or any foreign bank
maintaining a branch or agency licensed under the laws of the United States, or any subsidiary
or affiliate thereof, nor does this section apply to any entity subject to regulation by the Federal
Communications Commission under Title 47 of the United States Code or by the North Carolina
Utilities Commission under Chapter 62 of the General Statutes, or to any entity doing business
directly or through an affiliate pursuant to a franchise, license, certificate, or other authorization
issued by a political subdivision of the State or an agency thereof.
    (d1) This section does not apply to real estate professionals licensed under Chapter 93A
of the General Statutes.
    (e)      A violation of this section renders the automatic renewal clause void and
unenforceable."


Page 2                                 Session Law 2018-114                          House Bill 374
           SECTION 4.(b) This section becomes effective October 1, 2018, and applies to
contracts entered into or renewed on or after that date.

MOTORCYCLE FINANCING CHANGES
           SECTION 5.(a) G.S. 25A-34 reads as rewritten:
"§ 25A-34. Balloon payments.
    With respect to a consumer credit sale, other than one pursuant to a revolving charge account,
no scheduled payment may be more than ten percent (10%) larger than the average of earlier
scheduled payments, (except except that the final payment may be twenty-five percent (25%))
(25%) larger than the average of earlier scheduled payments. This provision section does not
apply when the payment schedule is adjusted to the seasonal or irregular income of the buyer.
This section does not apply to the sale of a motorcycle as defined in G.S. 20-4.01(27) with a
purchase price of seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500) or more."
           SECTION 5.(b) This section becomes effective December 1, 2018, and applies to
contracts entered into on or after that date.

CLARIFY REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS FOR EMPLOYEES OF ALARM
SYSTEMS BUSINESSES
            SECTION 6. G.S. 74D-8 reads as rewritten:
"§ 74D-8. Registration of persons employed.
    (a)(1) A licensee of an alarm systems business shall register with the Board within 30 days
after the employment begins, all of the following employees that are within the State, unless in
the discretion of the Director, the time period is extended for good cause:
                     a.      Any employee that has access to confidential information detailing the
                             design, installation, or application of any location specific electronic
                             security system or that has access to any code, number, or program
                             that would allow the system to be modified, altered, or circumvented.
                     b.      Any employee who installs or services an electronic security system
                             in a commercial business establishment or a personal residence.
                     Employees engaged only in sales or marketing that does not involve any of
                     the above are not required to be registered.
            (1a) To register an employee, a licensee shall submit to the Board as to the
                     employee: set(s) of classifiable fingerprints on standard F.B.I. applicant cards;
                     recent color photograph(s) of acceptable quality for identification; and
                     statements of any criminal records as deemed appropriate by the Board.
            (2)      Except during the period allowed for registration in subdivision (a)(1) of this
                     section, no alarm systems business may employ any employee unless the
                     employee's registration has been approved by the Board as set forth in this
                     section.
    (b)     The Director shall be notified in writing of the termination of any employee registered
under this Chapter within 20 days after the termination.
    (c)     The Board shall issue a registration card to each employee of a licensee who is
registered under this Chapter. The registration card shall expire two years after its date of issuance
and shall be renewed before the expiration of the term of the registration. If a registered person
changes employment to another licensee, the registration card may remain valid; however,
persons changing employment must pay the fee authorized by G.S. 74D-7(e)(5).
    (d)     If all required documents, properly completed, have been submitted to the Board no
later than 20 days after an employee begins employment, the employer of each applicant for
registration shall give the applicant a copy of the complete application which the employee can
use until a registration card issued by the Board is received."


House Bill 374                         Session Law 2018-114                                   Page 3
MODIFY RENEWABLE PRECERTIFICATION FOR PERSONS TRANSPORTING
ESSENTIALS           OR      RESTORING            UTILITIES        DURING         EMERGENCY
DECLARATIONS
            SECTION 7. G.S. 166A-19.70(c) reads as rewritten:
    "(c) Certification System. – The Secretary shall develop a system pursuant to which a
person who transports essentials in commerce, or assists in ensuring their availability, and
persons who assist in the restoring of utility services can be certified as such. The certification
system shall allow for both preemergency pre-emergency declaration and postemergency
post-emergency declaration certification and may include an annuallywith renewable
precertification. The Secretary shall only allow those who routinely transport or distribute
essentials or assist in the restoring of utility services to be certified. A certification of the
employer shall constitute a certification of the employer's employees. The Secretary shall create
an easily recognizable indicium of certification in order to assist local officials' efforts to
determine which persons have received certification by the system established under this
subsection."

MITIGATION BONDING REFORM
           SECTION 8. The Division of Mitigation Services shall review and revise its bidding
and contracting procedures for procurement of mitigation services to include, at a minimum, the
following policies:
           (1)     Bonding or other financial surety required for the construction of a mitigation
                   project shall reflect only the minimum amount necessary to secure State funds
                   provided through a contract between the Division and a private mitigation
                   provider.
           (2)     Post-construction bonding periods and amounts shall reflect the minimum
                   length of time necessary to determine with a reasonable degree of certainty
                   project success and the reasonably determined level of financial risk to the
                   State from total or partial failure of the mitigation project.
           The Division shall report to the Environmental Review Commission regarding the
review and revisions required by this section no later than December 1, 2018. The report shall
include an explanation of the methodology followed in setting bonding amounts and time lines
for procured mitigation projects and a description of any changes made to the Division's
procedures as a result of the review required by this section.

CLARIFY IMPROVEMENT PERMIT AND CONSTRUCTION AUTHORIZATION
EXTENSIONS FOR WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
            SECTION 9. G.S. 130A-336(b1) reads as rewritten:
    "(b1) An improvement permit or authorization for wastewater system construction issued
by a local health department from January 1, 2000, to January 1, 2015, which has not been acted
on and would have otherwise expired, shall remain valid until January 1, 2020, without penalty,
unless there are changes in the hydraulic flows or wastewater characteristics from the original
local health department evaluation. Permits are transferrable with ownership of the property.
Permits shall retain the site, soil evaluations, and construction conditions of the original permit.
Site activities begun or completed pursuant to requirements from the local health department
under the original permit, however, shall not be construed to be altered conditions and shall not
constitute a basis for refusal of the permit extension. The property owner may contract with a
person licensed pursuant to Chapter 89F of the General Statutes as a licensed soil scientist to
conduct a site verification to determine whether the conditions of the original permit are
unchanged. Written verification by the licensed soil scientist shall be accepted by the local health
department, used in lieu of verification by the local health department, and be attached to the
permit."

Page 4                                Session Law 2018-114                          House Bill 374
STUDY MANDATORY CONNECTION AUTHORITY RELATING TO USE OF
ENGINEER OPTION PERMIT FOR WASTEWATER
            SECTION 10. Section 24.3(c) of S.L. 2017-57 reads as rewritten:
    "SECTION 24.3.(c) The Legislative Research Commission shall study the issues raised in
this section and make recommendations to the General Assembly on:
            (1)    Fee and charge setting by units of local government in the operation of a water
                   or sewer system, including collection rates of those fees and charges.
            (2)    Proper accounting controls to ensure transparency in budgeting and
                   accounting for expenditures and interfund transfers of public enterprise
                   services by units of local government.
            (3)    Legislation that may be necessary to ensure proper funding of infrastructure
                   maintenance and improvements for the provision of water and sewer services,
                   including whether regionalization could facilitate financially healthy systems
                   with lower fees and charges to customers.
            (4)    Legislation that may be necessary to ensure that units of local government
                   monitor aging water and sewer infrastructure to ensure proper maintenance
                   and repair, including how this responsibility impacts the financial health of
                   the public enterprise.
            (5)    Legislation that may be necessary to grant or clarify mandatory connection
                   authority relating to use of the engineer option permit for wastewater and
                   relating to multiple public systems operating as one, however constituted, or
                   public-private partnerships."

REVISE WASTEWATER PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS
            SECTION 11.(a) G.S. 130A-334(9a) reads as rewritten:
            "(9a) "Repair" means the extension, alteration, replacement, or relocation of
                   existing components of a wastewater system. Replacement of a damaged
                   gravity distribution box by an on-site wastewater contractor certified under
                   Article 5 of Chapter 90A of the General Statutes shall not constitute a repair
                   to a permitted wastewater system."
            SECTION 11.(b) G.S. 130A-334(15) reads as rewritten:
            "(15) "Wastewater system" means a system of wastewater collection, treatment, and
                   disposal in single or multiple components, including a ground absorption
                   system, privy, septic tank system, public or community wastewater system,
                   wastewater reuse or recycle system, mechanical or biological wastewater
                   treatment system, any other similar system, and any chemical toilet used only
                   for human waste. A wastewater system located on multiple adjoining lots or
                   tracts of land under common ownership or control shall be considered a single
                   system for purposes of permitting under this Article."
            SECTION 11.(c) G.S. 130A-335 reads as rewritten:
"§ 130A-335. Wastewater collection, treatment and disposal; rules.
    …
    (a1) Any proposed site for a residence, place of business, or a place of public assembly
located in an area that is not served by an approved wastewater system for which a new
wastewater system is proposed or repair is necessary for compliance may be evaluated for soil
conditions and site features by a person licensed pursuant to Chapter 89F of the General Statutes
as a licensed soil scientist. For purposes of this subsection, "site features" include topography
and landscape position; soil characteristics (morphology); soil wetness; soil depth; restrictive
horizons; available space; and other applicable factors that involve accepted public health
principles. A person licensed pursuant to Chapter 89E of the General Statutes as a licensed

House Bill 374                        Session Law 2018-114                                 Page 5
geologist may evaluate the proposed site or repair area, as applicable, for geologic and
hydrogeologic conditions.
    (a2) Evaluations conducted by a licensed soil scientist or a licensed geologist pursuant to
subsection (a1) of this section to produce design and construction features for a new proposed
wastewater system or a proposed repair project for an existing wastewater system, including the
addressing of any special hydrologic conditions that may be required under the applicable rules
for an authorization to construct or for permitting, shall be approved by the applicable permitting
authorities under G.S. 130A-336 and G.S. 130A-336.1, provided both of the following
conditions are met:
           (1)     The evalutation of soil conditions, site features, or geologic and hydrogeologic
                   conditions satisfies all requirements of this Article. The evaluation shall not
                   cover areas outside the scope of the applicable license.
           (2)     The licensed soil scientist or licensed geologist conducting the evaluation
                   maintains an errors and omissions liability insurance policy issued by an
                   insurer licensed under Chapter 58 of the General Statutes in an amount
                   commensurate with the risk.
    …
    (c)    A wastewater system subject to approval under rules of the Commission shall be
reviewed and approved under rules of a local board of health in the following circumstances:
           (1)     The local board of health, on its own motion, has requested the Department to
                   review its proposed rules concerning wastewater systems; and
           (2)     The local board of health has adopted by reference the wastewater system
                   rules adopted by the Commission, with any more stringent modifications or
                   additions deemed necessary by the local board of health to protect the public
                   health;health. Local boards of health shall use historical experience to
                   establish modifications or additions to rules established by the Commission;
                   and
           (3)     The Department has found that the rules rules, including modifications or
                   additions to the Commission's rules, of the local board of health concerning
                   wastewater collection, treatment and disposal systems are at least as stringent
                   as rules adopted by the Commission and are sufficient and necessary to
                   safeguard the public health.
    …."

EXPAND DEFINITION OF ACCEPTED WASTEWATER DISPERSAL SYSTEM TO
INCLUDE APPROVED TRENCH DISPERSAL SYSTEMS
          SECTION 12. G.S. 130A-343 reads as rewritten:
"§ 130A-343. Approval of on-site subsurface wastewater systems.
    (a)   Definitions. – As used in this section:
          (1)     "Accepted wastewater dispersal system" means any subsurface wastewater
                  dispersal system, other than a conventional wastewater system, that: (i) has
                  been previously approved as an innovative wastewater dispersal system or
                  other approved trench dispersal system by the Department; (ii) has been in
                  general use in this State as an innovative a wastewater dispersal system for
                  more than five years; and (iii) has been approved by the Commission for
                  general use or use in one or more specific applications. An accepted
                  wastewater dispersal system may be approved for use in applications for
                  which a conventional wastewater system is unsuitable. The Commission may
                  impose any design, operation, maintenance, monitoring, and management
                  requirements on the use of an accepted wastewater dispersal system that it
                  determines to be appropriate.

Page 6                                Session Law 2018-114                         House Bill 374
             …
    (h)      Accepted Wastewater Dispersal Systems. – A manufacturer of an innovative
wastewater dispersal system or other approved trench dispersal system that has been in general
use in this State for a minimum of five years may petition the Commission to have the system
designated as an accepted wastewater system as provided in this subsection. The manufacturer
shall provide the Commission with the data and findings of all prior evaluations of the
performance of the system in this State and other states referenced in the petition, including
disclosure of any conditions found to result in unacceptable structural integrity, treatment, or
hydraulic performance. In addition, the manufacturer shall provide the Commission with
information sufficient to enable the Commission to fully evaluate the performance of the system
in this State for at least the five-year period immediately preceding the petition. The Commission
shall designate a wastewater system as an accepted wastewater system only if it finds that there
is clear, convincing, and cogent evidence (i) to confirm the findings made by the Department at
the time the Department approved the system as an innovative wastewater systema wastewater
dispersal system and (ii) that the system performs in a manner that is equal or superior to a
conventional wastewater system under actual field conditions in this State. The Commission shall
specify the circumstances in which use of the system is appropriate and any conditions and
limitations related to the use of the system.
    …."

CAP CERTAIN TITLE V AIR QUALITY PERMIT FEES
            SECTION 13.(a) Definitions. – "Permit and Application Fees Rule" means 15A
NCAC 02Q .0203 (Permit and Application Fees) for purposes of this section and its
implementation.
            SECTION 13.(b) Permit Fee Rule. – Until the effective date of the revised
permanent rule that the Environmental Management Commission is required to adopt pursuant
to subsection (d) of this section, the Commission and local air permitting programs shall
implement the Permit and Application Fees Rule as provided in subsection (c) of this section.
            SECTION 13.(c) Implementation. – With respect to air curtain burner facilities with
emissions below the Title V major source threshold that are subject to the Title V permitting
program due to regulations in 40 C.F.R. Part 60 that require facilities to obtain a Title V permit
regardless of actual or potential emissions, the Permit and Application Fees Rule shall be
implemented to provide that the annual permit fee and permit application fee for a general permit
for these facilities shall be ten percent (10%) of the otherwise applicable fee.
            SECTION 13.(d) Additional Rule-Making Authority. – The Commission shall adopt
a rule to amend the Permit and Application Fees Rule consistent with subsection (c) of this
section. Notwithstanding G.S. 150B-19(4), the rule adopted by the Commission pursuant to this
section shall be substantively identical to the provisions of subsection (c) of this section. Rules
adopted pursuant to this section are not subject to Part 3 of Article 2A of Chapter 150B of the
General Statutes. Rules adopted pursuant to this section shall become effective as provided in
G.S. 150B-21.3(b1) as though 10 or more written objections had been received as provided in
G.S. 150B-21.3(b2).
            SECTION 13.(e) Sunset. – This section expires when permanent rules adopted as
required by subsection (d) of this section become effective.

ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT COMMISSION TO REVIEW LOCAL
GOVERNMENT IMPLEMENTATION OF CERTAIN WATER QUALITY LAWS
           SECTION 14. The Environmental Management Commission shall review the
delegated stormwater management programs implemented by local governments to determine (i)
which local governments are enforcing stormwater regulations that exceed the requirements of
State law, including requirements for inspection and maintenance of stormwater controls and

House Bill 374                        Session Law 2018-114                                  Page 7
best management practices, and (ii) which local governments have taken enforcement actions
since August 1, 2015, based on requirements in Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL)
calculations or National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits that exceed
the requirements of State law. The Commission shall report its findings to the Environmental
Review Commission no later than January 1, 2019.

AUTHORIZE REPLACEMENT OF CERTAIN TEMPORARY EROSION CONTROL
STRUCTURES
            SECTION 15. G.S. 113A-115.1 reads as rewritten:
"§ 113A-115.1. Limitations on erosion control structures.
    (a)     As used in this section:
            (1)     "Erosion control structure" means a breakwater, bulkhead, groin, jetty,
                    revetment, seawall, or any similar structure.
            (1a) "Estuarine shoreline" means all shorelines that are not ocean shorelines that
                    border estuarine waters as defined in G.S. 113A-113(b)(2).
            (2)     "Ocean shoreline" means the Atlantic Ocean, the oceanfront beaches, and
                    frontal dunes. The term "ocean shoreline" includes an ocean inlet and lands
                    adjacent to an ocean inlet but does not include that portion of any inlet and
                    lands adjacent to the inlet that exhibits characteristics of estuarine shorelines.
            (3)     "Terminal groin" means one or more structures constructed at the terminus of
                    an island or on the side of an inlet, with a main stem generally perpendicular
                    to the beach shoreline, that is primarily intended to protect the terminus of the
                    island from shoreline erosion and inlet migration. A "terminal groin" shall be
                    pre-filled with beach quality sand and allow sand moving in the littoral zone
                    to flow past the structure. A "terminal groin" may include other design
                    features, such as a number of smaller supporting structures, that are consistent
                    with sound engineering practices and as recommended by a professional
                    engineer licensed to practice pursuant to Chapter 89C of the General Statutes.
                    A "terminal groin" is not a jetty.
    (b)     No person shall construct a permanent erosion control structure in an ocean shoreline.
The Commission shall not permit the construction of a temporary erosion control structure that
consists of anything other than sandbags in an ocean shoreline. This subsection shall not apply
to any of the following:
            (1)     Any permanent erosion control structure that is approved pursuant to an
                    exception set out in a rule adopted by the Commission prior to July 1, 2003.
            (2)     Any permanent erosion control structure that was originally constructed prior
                    to July 1, 1974, and that has since been in continuous use to protect an inlet
                    that is maintained for navigation.
            (3)     Any terminal groin permitted pursuant to this section.
    (b1) This section shall not be construed to limit the authority of the Commission to adopt
rules to designate or protect areas of environmental concern, to govern the use of sandbags, or to
govern the use of erosion control structures in estuarine shorelines.
    (c)     The Commission may renew a permit for an erosion control structure issued a
permanent erosion control structure originally permitted pursuant to a variance granted by the
Commission prior to July 1, 1995. The Commission may authorize the replacement of a
permanent erosion control structure that was permitted by the Commission pursuant to a variance
granted by the Commission prior to July 1, 1995, if the Commission finds that: (i) the structure
will not be enlarged beyond the dimensions set out in the original permit; (ii) there is no practical
alternative to replacing the structure that will provide the same or similar benefits; and (iii) the
replacement structure will comply with all applicable laws and with all rules, other than the rule


Page 8                                 Session Law 2018-114                          House Bill 374
or rules with respect to which the Commission granted the variance, that are in effect at the time
the structure is replaced.
     (c1) The Commission may authorize the repair or replacement of a temporary erosion
control structure that was originally permitted prior to July 1, 1995, if the Commission finds that
(i) the structure is located adjacent to an intertidal marine rock outcropping designated by the
State as a Natural Heritage Area pursuant to Part 42 of Article 2 of Chapter 143B of the General
Statutes and (ii) the replacement structure will comply with all applicable laws and with all rules,
other than the rule or rules with respect to which the Commission granted the variance, that are
in effect at the time the structure is replaced.
     …."

COASTAL STORMWATER PROGRAM VARIANCES
            SECTION 16.(a) Notwithstanding S.L. 2008-211 and rules adopted to implement
the act, any subdivision meeting all of the following requirements shall be deemed to be in
compliance with the impervious surface limitations of the act and its implementing rules:
            (1)      The subdivision's original declaration of covenants was recorded at least 20
                     years prior to the effective date of this act.
            (2)      The original developer of the subdivision transferred the stormwater permit to
                     the homeowners association for the subdivision and, at the time of the transfer,
                     the homeowners association had no notice from the original developer or any
                     regulatory agency that the subdivision was not in compliance with the
                     impervious surface limitations.
            SECTION 16.(b) This section applies only to impervious surface built prior to
January 1, 2017. Any impervious surface built on or after January 1, 2017, shall be subject to
S.L. 2008-211 and its implementing rules.
            SECTION 16.(c) Notwithstanding S.L. 2008-211 and rules adopted to implement
the act, a regional water facility shall not be required to increase the size of its wet detention
ponds or decrease the amount of development or impervious surface for which it has been
permitted based on an incorrect calculation in its stormwater management permit. This section
shall not apply to a regional water facility that intentionally provided inaccurate information upon
which the incorrect calculation is based.
            SECTION 16.(d) This section is effective when it becomes law and applies to
permits issued before and after that date.

ALLOW AMERICAN EELS TO BE IMPORTED FROM MARYLAND FOR
AQUACULTURE PURPOSES
          SECTION 17. Section 3.1(c) of S.L. 2017-190 reads as rewritten:
   "SECTION 3.1.(c) Implementation. – Use of American eels imported from Virginia
Maryland, Virginia, or South Carolina in an aquaculture operation is exempt from the permitting
requirements of the Importation of Marine and Estuarine Organisms Rule."

ABOVEGROUND TANKS INSTITUTIONAL CONTROLS CLARIFICATION
            SECTION 18.(a) G.S. 143B-279.9 reads as rewritten:
"§ 143B-279.9. Land-use restrictions may be imposed to reduce danger to public health at
            contaminated sites.
    …
    Except with respect to land contaminated from a discharge or release of petroleum from an
underground storage tank, the imposition of restrictions on the current or future use of real
property on With respect to sites contaminated by the discharge or release of petroleum from an
aboveground storage tank, or another petroleum source, from which contamination has migrated
to off-site properties, as that term is defined under G.S. 130A-310.65(3a), the imposition of

House Bill 374                         Session Law 2018-114                                  Page 9
restrictions on the current or future use of real property on such a site shall only be allowed as
provided inif the Department has determined that the requirements of G.S. 143-215.104AA or
G.S. 130A-310.73A, as applicable.applicable, have been satisfied for the site.
    …."
            SECTION 18.(b) G.S. 143B-279.11 reads as rewritten:
"§ 143B-279.11. Recordation of residual petroleum from underground or aboveground
            storage tanks or other sources.
    …
    (h)     Except with respect to land contaminated from a discharge or release of petroleum
from an underground storage tank, the provisions of this section shall only apply With respect to
sites contaminated by the discharge or release of petroleum from an aboveground storage tank,
or another petroleum source, from which contamination has migrated to off-site properties, as
that term is defined under G.S. 130A-310.65(3a), in compliance with the provisions of this
section shall only apply if the Department has determined that the requirements of
G.S. 143-215.104AA or G.S. 130A-310.73A, as applicable.applicable, have been satisfied for
the site."
            SECTION 18.(c) This section becomes effective retroactively to October 4, 2017.

MODIFY OTHER REQUIREMENTS FOR UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS
(USTS)
            SECTION 19.(a) Definitions. – "General Requirements Applicable to Performance
Standards for UST System or UST System Component Installation or Replacement Rule" means
15A NCAC 2N .0901 (General Requirements) for purposes of this section and its
implementation.
            SECTION 19.(b) General Requirements Applicable to Performance Standards for
UST System or UST System Component Installation or Replacement Rule. – Until the effective
date of the revised permanent rule that the Environmental Management Commission is required
to adopt pursuant to subsection (d) of this section, the Commission shall implement the General
Requirements Applicable to Performance Standards for UST System or UST System Component
Installation or Replacement Rule, as provided in subsection (c) of this section.
            SECTION 19.(c) Implementation. – Notwithstanding subsection (n) of the General
Requirements Applicable to Performance Standards for UST System or UST System Component
Installation or Replacement Rule, the Commission shall not require overfill prevention
equipment to be checked annually for operability, proper operating condition and proper
calibration in accordance with the manufacturer's written guidelines, but shall instead require
such equipment to be checked for these purposes once every three years as provided for under
federal law.
            SECTION 19.(d) Additional Rule-Making Authority. – The Commission shall adopt
a rule to amend the General Requirements Applicable to Performance Standards for UST System
or UST System Component Installation or Replacement Rule consistent with subsection (c) of
this section. Notwithstanding G.S. 150B-19(4), the rule adopted by the Commission pursuant to
this section shall be substantively identical to the provisions of subsection (c) of this section.
Rules adopted pursuant to this section are not subject to Part 3 of Article 2A of Chapter 150B of
the General Statutes. Rules adopted pursuant to this section shall become effective as provided
in G.S. 150B-21.3(b1) as though 10 or more written objections had been received as provided by
G.S. 150B-21.3(b2).
            SECTION 19.(e) Sunset. – This section expires when permanent rules adopted as
required by subsection (d) of this section become effective.
            SECTION 19.1.(a)         Definitions. – For purposes of this section and its
implementation, "UST Rules" means Subchapter 2N (Underground Storage Tanks) of 15A
NCAC.

Page 10                               Session Law 2018-114                        House Bill 374
             SECTION 19.1.(b) UST Rules. – Until the effective date of the revised permanent
rule that the Environmental Management Commission is required to adopt pursuant to subsection
(d) of this section, the Commission shall implement the UST Rules, as provided in subsection (c)
of this section.
             SECTION 19.1.(c) Implementation. – Notwithstanding any prohibition under the
UST Rules, or guidance adopted by the Department of Environmental Quality thereunder, the
Department shall allow owners or operators of USTs to use all test methods and testing
equipment that are approved by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, including
the use of a Testable Drop Tube, for required testing of UST equipment.
             SECTION 19.1.(d) Additional Rule-Making Authority. – The Commission shall
adopt a rule to amend the UST Rules consistent with subsection (c) of this section.
Notwithstanding G.S. 150B-19(4), the rule adopted by the Commission pursuant to this section
shall be substantively identical to the provisions of subsection (c) of this section. Rules adopted
pursuant to this section are not subject to Part 3 of Article 2A of Chapter 150B of the General
Statutes. Rules adopted pursuant to this section shall become effective as provided in
G.S. 150B-21.3(b1) as though 10 or more written objections had been received as provided by
G.S. 150B-21.3(b2).
             SECTION 19.1.(e) Sunset. – This section expires when permanent rules adopted as
required by subsection (d) of this section become effective.

EXPAND EXEMPTIONS FOR CERTAIN LOCAL GOVERNMENTS' AUTHORITY TO
ENACT FLOW CONTROL
            SECTION 20.(a) G.S. 130A-291(c) reads as rewritten:
     "(c) Except as provided in subsections (d) and (e) of this section, a unit of local
government may, by ordinance, franchise, business license, contract, or otherwise, require that
all solid waste generated within the geographic area and placed in the waste stream for disposal
be delivered to the permitted solid waste management facility or facilities serving the geographic
area only under one of the following conditions:
            (1)     If the unit of local government has debt associated with solid waste
                    management facilities and equipment outstanding on September 1, 2017, the
                    unit of local government may adopt and enforce such an ordinance until the
                    date that such debt has matured.
            (2)     If the unit of local government incurs debt after September 1, 2017, and the
                    issuance of the debt will be conditioned upon the unit of local government
                    requiring that all waste collected within the county be disposed of within the
                    landfill, for expansion of a landfill or construction of a new landfill after all
                    necessary approvals for issuance of the debt have been obtained from the
                    Local Government Commission in compliance with Chapter 159 of the
                    General Statutes, including the demonstration of need and cost required by
                    G.S. 159-211, the unit of local government may adopt and enforce such an
                    ordinance until the date the debt associated with expansion of the landfill, or
                    construction of the new landfill, has matured.
            (3)     If the unit of local government is a party to an exclusive franchise agreement
                    with a private entity governing the management or disposal of waste within
                    the jurisdiction in effect on September 1, 2017, the unit of local government
                    may adopt and enforce such an ordinance until the date that such franchise has
                    expired.
            (4)     lf the unit of local government purchased or otherwise acquired title to
                    property between January 1, 2006, and September 1, 2017, with the specific
                    intent of adding the property to an existing landfill for the disposal of
                    municipal solid waste, which landfill (i) is contiguous to the property

House Bill 374                         Session Law 2018-114                                 Page 11
                acquired; (ii) had been issued an operating permit on or before September 1,
                2017; and (iii) received less than 55,000 tons of waste in fiscal year
                2016-2017."
           SECTION 20.(b) This section expires on June 30, 2019.

CLARIFY LANDFILL LIFE-OF-SITE/FRANCHISE REQUIREMENTS
             SECTION 21.(a) G.S. 130A-294(a4) reads as rewritten:
"§ 130A-294. Solid waste management program.
    …
    (a4) In order to preserve long-term disposal capacity, a life-of-site permit issued for a
sanitary landfill shall survive the expiration of a local government approval or
franchise.franchise, and the local government shall allow the sanitary landfill to continue to
operate until the term of the landfill's life-of-site permit expires provided that the owner or
operator has complied with the terms of the local government approval or franchise agreement,
and remains in compliance with those terms after expiration of the approval or agreement until
the life-of-site permit has expired. In order to preserve any economic benefits included in the
franchise, the County may extend the franchise under the same terms and conditions for the term
of the life-of-site permit. The extension of the franchise hereby shall not trigger the requirements
for a new permit, a major permit modification, or a substantial amendment to the permit. This
subsection only applies to valid and operative franchise agreements in effect on October 1, 2015."
             SECTION 21.(b) G.S. 160A-319(a) reads as rewritten:
"§ 160A-319. Utility franchises.
    (a)      A city shall have authority to grant upon reasonable terms franchises for a telephone
system and any of the enterprises listed in G.S. 160A-311, except a cable television system. A
franchise granted by a city authorizes the operation of the franchised activity within the city. No
franchise shall be granted for a period of more than 60 years, including a franchise granted to a
sanitary landfill for the life-of-site of the landfill pursuant to G.S. 130A-294(b1); provided,
however, that a years. A franchise granted for a sanitary landfill shall be subject to all
requirements pertaining thereto under G.S. 130A-294. A franchise for solid waste collection or
disposal systems and facilities, other than sanitary landfills, shall not be granted for a period of
more than 30 years. Except as otherwise provided by law, when a city operates an enterprise, or
upon granting a franchise, a city may by ordinance make it unlawful to operate an enterprise
without a franchise.
    …."
             SECTION 21.(c) G.S. 153A-136(a) reads as rewritten:
"§ 153A-136. Regulation of solid wastes.
    (a)      A county may by ordinance regulate the storage, collection, transportation, use,
disposal, and other disposition of solid wastes. Such an ordinance may:
             …
             (3)     Grant a franchise to one or more persons for the exclusive right to
                     commercially collect or dispose of solid wastes within all or a defined portion
                     of the county and prohibit any other person from commercially collecting or
                     disposing of solid wastes in that area. The board of commissioners may set
                     the terms of any franchise; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted
                     for a period of more than 30 years, except for a franchise granted to a sanitary
                     landfill for the life-of-site of the landfill pursuant to G.S. 130A-294(b1),
                     which may not exceed 60 years. A franchise granted for a sanitary landfill
                     shall be subject to all requirements pertaining thereto under G.S. 130A-294.
                     No franchise by its terms may impair the authority of the board of
                     commissioners to regulate fees as authorized by this section.
             …."

Page 12                                Session Law 2018-114                          House Bill 374
AMEND RECOVERABLE COSTS IN FUEL CLAUSE RIDER FOR ELECTRIC
PUBLIC UTILITIES THAT HAVE FEWER THAN 150,000 NORTH CAROLINA
RETAIL JURISDICTIONAL CUSTOMERS TO INCLUDE THE COST OF PURPA QF
PURCHASED POWER AND SUBJECT THEM TO THE CURRENT 1% ANNUAL CAP
ON COST INCREASES
             SECTION 22. G.S. 62-133.2 reads as rewritten:
"§ 62-133.2. Fuel and fuel-related charge adjustments for electric utilities.
    (a)      The Commission shall permit an electric public utility that generates electric power
by fossil fuel or nuclear fuel to charge an increment or decrement as a rider to its rates for changes
in the cost of fuel and fuel-related costs used in providing its North Carolina customers with
electricity from the cost of fuel and fuel-related costs established in the electric public utility's
previous general rate case on the basis of cost per kilowatt hour.
    (a1) As used in this section, "cost of fuel and fuel-related costs" means all of the following:
             (1)    The cost of fuel burned.
             (2)    The cost of fuel transportation.
             (3)    The cost of ammonia, lime, limestone, urea, dibasic acid, sorbents, and
                    catalysts consumed in reducing or treating emissions.
             (4)    The total delivered noncapacity related costs, including all related
                    transmission charges, of all purchases of electric power by the electric public
                    utility, that are subject to economic dispatch or economic curtailment.
             (5)    The capacity costs associated with all purchases of electric power from
                    qualifying cogeneration facilities and qualifying small power production
                    facilities, as defined in 16 U.S.C. § 796, that are subject to economic dispatch
                    by the electric public utility.
             (6)    Except for those costs recovered pursuant to G.S. 62-133.8(h), the total
                    delivered costs of all purchases of power from renewable energy facilities and
                    new renewable energy facilities pursuant to G.S. 62-133.8 or to comply with
                    any federal mandate that is similar to the requirements of subsections (b), (c),
                    (d), (e), and (f) of G.S. 62-133.8.
             (7)    The fuel cost component of other purchased power.
             (8)    Cost of fuel and fuel-related costs shall be adjusted for any net gains or losses
                    resulting from any sales by the electric public utility of fuel and other
                    fuel-related costs components.
             (9)    Cost of fuel and fuel-related costs shall be adjusted for any net gains or losses
                    resulting from any sales by the electric public utility of by-products produced
                    in the generation process to the extent the costs of the inputs leading to that
                    by-product are costs of fuel or fuel-related costs.
             (10) The total delivered costs, including capacity and noncapacity costs, associated
                    with all purchases of electric power from qualifying cogeneration facilities
                    and qualifying small power production facilities, as defined in 16 U.S.C. §
                    796, that are not subject to economic dispatch or economic curtailment by the
                    electric public utility and not otherwise recovered under subdivision (6) of this
                    subsection.
             (11) All nonadministrative costs related to the renewable energy procurement
                    pursuant to G.S. 62-159.2 not recovered from the program participants.
    …
    (a3) Notwithstanding subsections (a1) and (a2) of this section, for an electric public utility
that has fewer than 150,000 North Carolina retail jurisdictional customers as of December 31,
2006, the costs identified in subdivisions (1), (2), (6), and (7)(7), and (10) of subsection (a1) of
this section and the fuel cost component, as may be modified by the Commission, of electric

House Bill 374                         Session Law 2018-114                                  Page 13
power purchases identified in subdivision (4) of subsection (a1) of this section shall be recovered
through the increment or decrement rider approved by the Commission pursuant to this section.
For the costs identified in subdivision subdivisions (6) and (10) of subsection (a1) of this section
that are incurred on or after January 1, 2008, the annual increase in the amount of these costs
shall not exceed one percent (1%) of the electric public utility's total North Carolina retail
jurisdictional gross revenues for the preceding calendar year. These costs described in
subdivision subdivisions (6) and (10) of subsection (a1) of this section shall be recoverable from
each class of customers as a separate component of the rider. For the costs described in
subdivision subdivisions (6) and (10) of subsection (a1) of this section, the specific component
for each class of customers shall be determined by allocating these costs among customer classes
based on the electric public utility's North Carolina peak demand for the prior year, as determined
by the Commission, until the Commission determines how these costs shall be allocated in a
general rate case for the electric public utility commenced on or after January 1, 2008.
    …."

AMEND PROCESS FOR VACANCY APPOINTMENTS TO THE UTILITIES
COMMISSION AND THE INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION
           SECTION 23.(a) G.S. 62-10(g) reads as rewritten:
    "(g) If a vacancy arises or exists pursuant to either subsection (a) or (c) or (f) of this section
when the General Assembly is not in session, and the appointment is deemed urgent by the
Governor, the commissioner may be appointed and serve on an interim basis pending
confirmation by the General Assembly.Assembly; provided, however, no person may be
appointed to serve on an interim basis pending confirmation by the General Assembly if the
person was subject to but not confirmed by the General Assembly within the preceding four
years. The limitation on appointment contained in this subsection includes, among other things,
unfavorable action on a joint resolution for confirmation, such as the resolution failing on any
reading in either chamber of the General Assembly, and failure to ratify a joint resolution for
confirmation prior to adjournment of the then current session of the General Assembly."
           SECTION 23.(b) G.S. 97-77(a1) reads as rewritten:
    "(a1) Appointments of commissioners are subject to confirmation by the General Assembly
by joint resolution. The names of commissioners to be appointed by the Governor shall be
submitted by the Governor to the General Assembly for confirmation by the General Assembly
on or before March 1 of the year of expiration of the term. If the Governor fails to timely submit
nominations, the General Assembly shall appoint to fill the succeeding term upon the joint
recommendation of the President Pro Tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of
Representatives in accordance with G.S. 120-121 not inconsistent with this section.
    In case of death, incapacity, resignation, or any other vacancy in the office of any
commissioner prior to the expiration of the term of office, a nomination to fill the vacancy for
the remainder of the unexpired term shall be submitted by the Governor within four weeks after
the vacancy arises to the General Assembly for confirmation by the General Assembly. If the
Governor fails to timely nominate a person to fill the vacancy, the General Assembly shall
appoint a person to fill the remainder of the unexpired term upon the joint recommendation of
the President Pro Tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives in
accordance with G.S. 120-121 not inconsistent with this section. If a vacancy arises or exists
pursuant to this subsection when the General Assembly is not in session, and the appointment is
deemed urgent by the Governor, the commissioner may be appointed and serve on an interim
basis pending confirmation by the General Assembly.Assembly; provided, however, no person
may be appointed to serve on an interim basis pending confirmation by the General Assembly if
the person was subject to but not confirmed by the General Assembly within the preceding four
years. The limitation on appointment contained in this subsection includes, among other things,
unfavorable action on a joint resolution for confirmation, such as the resolution failing on any

Page 14                                Session Law 2018-114                          House Bill 374
reading in either chamber of the General Assembly, and failure to ratify a joint resolution for
confirmation prior to adjournment of the then current session of the General Assembly. For the
purpose of this subsection, the General Assembly is not in session only (i) prior to convening of
the Regular Session, (ii) during any adjournment of the Regular Session for more than 10 days,
and (iii) after sine die adjournment of the Regular Session.
    No person while in office as a commissioner may be nominated or appointed on an interim
basis to fill the remainder of an unexpired term, or to a full term that commences prior to the
expiration of the term that the commissioner is serving."
             SECTION 23.(c) This section is effective when it becomes law and applies to
appointments made on or after that date.

ADJUST NUMBER OF ASSISTANT DISTRICT ATTORNEYS
            SECTION 24.(a) Section 18B.6 of S.L. 2018-5 reads as rewritten:
    "SECTION 18B.6. Effective January 1, 2019, G.S. 7A-41(a1) G.S. 7A-60(a1) reads as
rewritten:
    …."
            SECTION 24.(b) Effective January 1, 2019, G.S. 7A-60(a1), as amended by Section
18B.6 of S.L. 2018-5, reads as rewritten:
    "(a1) The counties of the State are organized into prosecutorial districts, and each district
has the counties and the number of full-time assistant district attorneys set forth in the following
table:
                                                                               No. of Full-Time
    Prosecutorial                                                               Asst. District
        District                             Counties                             Attorneys
           1                  Camden, Chowan, Currituck,                                11
                                Dare, Gates, Pasquotank,
                              Perquimans
           2                  Beaufort, Hyde, Martin,                                    8
                                Tyrrell, Washington
           3                  Pitt                                                      12
           4                  Carteret, Craven, Pamlico                                 13
           5                  Duplin, Jones, Onslow, Sampson                            19
           6                  New Hanover, Pender                                       19
           7                  Bertie, Halifax, Hertford,                                11
                                Northampton
           8                  Edgecombe, Nash, Wilson                                   19
           9                  Greene, Lenoir, Wayne                                     14
           10                 Franklin, Granville, Person                            1415
                                Vance, Warren
           11                 Wake                                                      42
           12                 Harnett, Lee                                              11
           13                 Johnston                                                  10
           14                 Cumberland                                                25
           15                 Bladen, Brunswick, Columbus                               14
           16                 Durham                                                    18
           17                 Alamance                                                  12
           18                 Orange, Chatham                                           10
           19                 Scotland, Hoke                                             7
           20                 Robeson                                                   12
           21                 Anson, Richmond                                            6
           22                 Caswell, Rockingham                                       98

House Bill 374                        Session Law 2018-114                                 Page 15
          23                  Stokes, Surry                                           8
          24                  Guilford                                               34
          25                  Cabarrus                                                9
          26                  Montgomery, Randolph                                   10
          27                  Rowan                                                   9
          28                  Moore                                                   5
          29                  Stanly                                                  5
          30                  Union                                                  11
          31                  Forsyth                                                27
          32                  Alexander, Iredell                                     12
          33                  Davidson, Davie                                        12
          34                  Alleghany, Ashe, Wilkes, Yadkin                         9
          35                  Avery, Madison, Mitchell,                               8
                                Watauga, Yancey
          36                  Burke, Caldwell, Catawba                               19
          37                  Mecklenburg                                            58
          38                  Gaston                                                 15
          39                  Cleveland, Lincoln                                     12
          40                  Buncombe                                               14
          41                  McDowell, Rutherford                                    8
          42                  Henderson, Polk, Transylvania                           9
          43                  Cherokee, Clay, Graham,                                12
                                         Haywood, Jackson, Macon, Swain."

EXEMPT PERSONAL PROPERTY OF CHARTER SCHOOLS FROM PROPERTY
TAX
           SECTION 25.(a) G.S. 105-275 reads as rewritten:
"§ 105-275. Property classified and excluded from the tax base.
    The following classes of property are designated special classes under Article V, Sec. 2(2),
of the North Carolina Constitution and are excluded from tax:
           …
           (46) Real and personal property that is occupied by a charter school and is wholly
                   and exclusively used for educational purposes as defined in
                   G.S. 105-278.4(f)G.S. 105-278.4(f), regardless of the ownership of the
                   property.
           …
           (49) A mobile classroom or modular unit that is occupied by a school and is wholly
                   and exclusively used for educational purposes, as defined in
                   G.S. 105-278.4(f), regardless of the ownership of the property. For the
                   purposes of this subdivision, the term "school" means a public school,
                   including any school operated by a local board of education in a local school
                   administrative unit; a nonprofit charter school; a regional school; a nonprofit
                   nonpublic school regulated under Article 39 of Chapter 115C of the General
                   Statutes; or a community college established under Article 2 of Chapter 115D
                   of the General Statutes."
           SECTION 25.(b) This section becomes effective for taxes imposed for taxable years
beginning on or after July 1, 2018.

MAINTENANCE OF ROADS SURROUNDING SCHOOLS
           SECTION 26. If Senate Bill 335, 2018 Regular Session, becomes law, Sections
7.4(a) and 7.4(b) are repealed.

Page 16                               Session Law 2018-114                        House Bill 374
REPEAL STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION POLICIES INCONSISTENT WITH STATE
LAW, AS AFFIRMED BY NC SUPREME COURT
           SECTION 27.(a) The General Assembly finds that the North Carolina Supreme
Court, in North Carolina State Board of Education v. State of North Carolina and Mark Johnson,
No. 333PA17 (June 8, 2018), affirmed the facial constitutionality of S.L. 2016-126 in clarifying
the authority of the Superintendent of Public Instruction as the administrative head of the
Department of Public Instruction and the Superintendent's role in the direct supervision of the
public school system. SBOP-011 (Responsibilities of the SBE in supervising/administering the
public school system of NC and the funds provided for its support) and SBOP-013 (Delegation
of Authority from the State Board of Education to the Superintendent of Public Instruction) are
repealed. The State Board of Education may readopt rules or policies related to internal
management that are not inconsistent with the statutory requirements of S.L. 2016-126,
including, but not limited to, the requirements of G.S. 115C-11, 115C-19, 115C-21, and
143A-441.

STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION INTERIM RULES
            SECTION 27.(b) The General Assembly finds that the North Carolina Supreme
Court, in North Carolina State Board of Education v. State of North Carolina and North Carolina
Rules Review Commission, No. 110PA16-2 (June 8, 2018), affirmed the authority of the General
Assembly to delegate authority to the Rules Review Commission to review and approve the
administrative rules that are proposed by the State Board of Education for codification. To ensure
that administration of the free public schools shall continue without interruption, the existing
policies of the State Board of Education subject to rule making as provided in Chapter 150B of
the General Statutes shall be deemed interim rules so long as they do not conflict with any
provisions of the General Statutes. Any interim rule authorized by this section shall become null
and void May 30, 2019, if the State Board of Education has failed to publish a notice of text in
the North Carolina Register to adopt that interim rule as a permanent rule, as required by
G.S. 150B-21.2. Any interim rule authorized by this section shall become null and void May 30,
2020, if the State Board of Education has failed to adopt that interim rule as a permanent rule by
that date in accordance with Article 2A of Chapter 150B of the General Statutes.

PROHIBIT THE NORTH CAROLINA BOARD OF FUNERAL SERVICE FROM
REVOKING OR REFUSING TO RENEW A FUNERAL LICENSE UNDER CERTAIN
CIRCUMSTANCES
            SECTION 28. The North Carolina Board of Funeral Service (Board) shall not revoke
or refuse to renew a license to practice funeral directing, embalming, or funeral service based on
a test score invalidated by the International Conference of Funeral Service Examining Boards
(Conference) if, prior to January 1, 2018, the Conference notified the Board that the licensee had
achieved a passing score on the licensing tests required by G.S. 90-210.25. This section shall not
apply if the Conference provides the Board with specific proof that a licensee has acted in a
manner that requires invalidation of a test score.

SEVERABILITY CLAUSE AND EFFECTIVE DATE
            SECTION 29. If any section or provision of this act is declared unconstitutional or
invalid by the courts, it does not affect the validity of this act as a whole or any part other than
the part declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.




House Bill 374                        Session Law 2018-114                                 Page 17
           SECTION 30. Except as otherwise provided, this act is effective when it becomes
law.
           In the General Assembly read three times and ratified this the 15th day of June, 2018.


                                          s/ Bill Rabon
                                             Presiding Officer of the Senate


                                          s/ David R. Lewis
                                             Presiding Officer of the House of Representatives


                                             VETO Roy Cooper
                                             Governor


           Became law notwithstanding the objections of the Governor at 5:57 p.m. this 27th day
of June, 2018.

                                          s/ Sarah Lang Holland
                                             Senate Principal Clerk




Page 18                              Session Law 2018-114                        House Bill 374
