A BILL TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT TO ESTABLISH THE UNFUNDED LIABILITY SOLVENCY RESERVE.
The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts:
SECTION 1. Article 4 of Chapter 143C of the General Statutes is amended by
adding a new section to read:
"§ 143C-4-8. Unfunded Liability Solvency Reserve.
(a)     Creation. – The Unfunded Liability Solvency Reserve is established as a reserve in
the General Fund. The Unfunded Liability Solvency Reserve is an employee benefits trust as
described under G.S. 143C-1-3(a).
(b)     Definitions. – The following definitions apply in this section:
(1)     Benefit enhancement. – Any change to the benefits provided under the
Teachers' and State Employees' Retirement System of North Carolina
established under G.S. 135-2 or to the Retiree Health Benefit Fund
established under G.S. 135-7(f) that is estimated to increase the contributions
or liabilities associated with either program, as indicated by an actuarial note
provided under G.S. 120-114.
(2)     Health Benefit Fund. – The Retiree Health Benefit Fund established under
G.S. 135-7(f).
(3)     Health Benefit Fund Actuarial Committee. – The Committee on Actuarial
Valuation of Retired Employees' Health Benefits established under
G.S. 135-48.12.
(4)     Reserve. – The Unfunded Liability Solvency Reserve established under
subsection (a) of this section.
(5)     Retirement System. – The Teachers' and State Employees' Retirement
System of North Carolina established under G.S. 135-2.
(c)     Source of Funds. – The Reserve shall receive the following funds:
(1)     Any amounts that shall be appropriated by the General Assembly.
(2)     Twenty-five percent (25%) of the unreserved fund balance of the current
fiscal year, as defined in G.S. 143C-1-1(d), and not otherwise designated,
shall be placed in the Reserve the next fiscal year.
(d)     Transfer of Funds From the Reserve. – The transfer of funds from the Reserve shall
meet all of the following requirements:
(1)     The funds in the Reserve shall be used only for transfers to the (i) Health
Benefit Fund or (ii) the Retirement System for the purpose of reducing the
unfunded liabilities of those two funds.
(2)     Funds in the Reserve must be appropriated by the end of the next fiscal year
after the funds entered the Reserve.
(3)    Transfers from the Reserve to the Health Benefit Fund and the Retirement
System shall not supplant employer contributions otherwise designated for
the Health Benefit Fund or Retirement System. Transfers shall be made from
the Reserve only upon the following conditions:
a.       The portion of the State's employer contribution rate provided to the
Health Benefit Fund is not less than the cost of the premiums for the
retirees served by the Retiree Health Benefit Fund in the most recent
plan year.
b.       The portion of the State's employer contribution rate provided to the
Retirement System in effect at the time of the transfer is equal to or
greater than the rate certified under G.S. 135-8 as necessary by the
Board of Trustees of the Retirement System.
c.       Transfers from the Reserves shall not be used to pay the cost of
benefit enhancements commencing after July 1, 2017.
(e)     Use of Funds in the Reserve. – On the first day of each fiscal year, the total balance
of the Reserve as of the last day of the preceding fiscal year shall be used to appropriate an
additional employer contribution to the Health Benefit Trust and the Retirement System. This
additional employer contribution shall be calculated as follows:
(1)    The total balance in the Reserve as of the last day of the preceding fiscal
year shall be divided between the Health Benefit Fund and the Retirement
System according to each program's proportion of the State's total unfunded
liability of both programs as reported in the most recent Comprehensive
Annual Financial Report issued by the State Controller.
(2)    Each program's pro rata share of the total balance in the Reserve as of the
last day of the preceding fiscal year shall be converted into a percentage of
the General Fund payroll of covered members of the Health Benefit Fund
and the Retirement System.
(3)    Each program's percentage of General Fund payroll of covered members, as
calculated in subdivision (2) of this subsection, shall be set as an additional
portion of the State's employer contribution rate budgeted for retirement and
related benefits. The following shall also apply:
a.       The percentage of General Fund payroll of covered members
allocated to the Health Benefit Fund shall be added to the portion of
the State's employer contribution rate budgeted for hospital and
medical benefits.
b.       The percentage of General Fund payroll of covered members
allocated to the Retirement System shall be added to the State's
employer contribution rate budgeted for the Retirement System.
(f)     Not Considered Debt Service Funds. – Any funds in the Reserve, as well as any
funds from the Reserve used to establish additional contributions to the Health Benefit Fund or
Retirement System, shall not be considered debt service funds for general long-term debt
principal and interest."
SECTION 2.(a) If House Bill 7, 2017 Regular Session, becomes law, then
G.S. 142-15.4 is amended by adding a new subsection to read:
"(d) If, and to the extent that, the balance of the Savings Reserve is at or above the
recommended Savings Reserve balance developed pursuant to G.S. 143C-4-2(f), whenever
general obligation bonds issued or incurred by the State are refinanced, the following shall
apply:
(1)      The General Assembly shall not reduce the funds appropriated for serving
the refinanced debt during the fiscal biennium in which the refinancing
occurs.
(2)     The State Controller shall, in conjunction with the State Treasurer,
periodically transfer the savings resulting from the refinancing of the debt to
the Unfunded Liability Solvency Reserve, established under G.S. 143C-4-8,
during the fiscal biennium in which the refinancing occurs.
(3)     In the fiscal biennium immediately following the refinancing, the Director of
the Budget shall adjust the amount of debt service funded in the base budget
so that it aligns with the actual debt service needs."
SECTION 2.(b) If House Bill 7, 2017 Regular Session, becomes law, then
G.S. 142-96 is amended by adding a new subsection to read:
"(d) If, and to the extent that, the balance of the Savings Reserve is at or above the
recommended Savings Reserve balance developed pursuant to G.S. 143C-4-2(f), whenever
special indebtedness issued or incurred by the State is refinanced, the following shall apply:
(1)     The General Assembly shall not reduce the funds appropriated for serving
the refinanced debt during the fiscal biennium in which the refinancing
occurs.
(2)     The State Controller shall, in conjunction with the State Treasurer,
periodically transfer the savings resulting from the refinancing of the debt to
the Unfunded Liability Solvency Reserve, established under G.S. 143C-4-8,
during the fiscal biennium in which the refinancing occurs.
(3)     In the fiscal biennium immediately following the refinancing, the Director of
the Budget shall adjust the amount of debt service funded in the base budget
so that it aligns with the actual debt service needs."
SECTION 2.(c) If House Bill 7, 2017 Regular Session, becomes law, then
G.S. 143C-4-2 is amended by adding two new subsections to read:
"(i)    Unfunded Liability Solvency Reserve Full-Growth Transfer Requirement. – If, and
to the extent that, the balance of the Savings Reserve is at or above the recommended Savings
Reserve balance developed under subsection (f) of this section as of the last day of the fiscal
year, the Current Operations Appropriations Act for the succeeding fiscal year shall include a
transfer to the Unfunded Liability Solvency Reserve of fifteen percent (15%) of the succeeding
fiscal year's estimated growth in State tax revenues that are deposited in the General Fund.
(j)     Unfunded Liability Solvency Reserve Partial Growth Transfer Requirement. – If,
and to the extent that, the balance of the Savings Reserve is below the recommended Savings
Reserve balance developed under subsection (f) of this section as of the last day of the fiscal
year, prior to the transfer of fifteen percent (15%) of the succeeding fiscal year's estimated
growth in State tax revenues that are deposited in the General Fund, then the following shall
apply:
(1)     If, upon transfer to the Savings Reserve funds in the amount of fifteen
percent (15%) of estimated growth in State tax revenues deposited in the
General Fund, the balance of the Savings Reserve is above the recommended
Savings Reserve balance developed under subsection (f) of this section, then
the Current Operations Appropriations Act shall include a transfer to the
Unfunded Liability Solvency Reserve of an amount equal to the difference
between the recommended balance of the Savings Reserve developed under
subsection (f) of this section and the balance of the Savings Reserve upon
transfer of fifteen percent (15%) of estimated growth in State tax revenues.
(2)     If, upon transfer to the Savings Reserve funds in the amount of fifteen
percent (15%) of estimated growth in State tax revenues deposited in the
General Fund, the balance of Savings Reserves is at or below the
recommended Savings Reserve balance developed under subsection (f) of
this section, then no such transfer described in subdivision (1) of this
subsection shall occur."
SECTION 2.(d) If House Bill 7, 2017 Regular Session, becomes law, then
G.S. 143C-4-8(c), as enacted by Section 1 of this act, is amended by adding a new subdivision
to read:
"(3) Funds transferred under G.S. 142-15.5, 142-96, and 143C-4.2."
SECTION 3. This act becomes effective July 1, 2017.