                     GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF NORTH CAROLINA
                           FIRST EXTRA SESSION 2018

                                   SESSION LAW 2018-131
                                      HOUSE BILL 3


AN ACT TO CLARIFY THE DESIGNATIONS TO APPEAR ON THE BALLOT FOR
  CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS AND OTHER REFERENDA.

The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts:

            SECTION 1.(a) G.S. 163A-1114(h) reads as rewritten:
    "(h) Order of Precedence for Referenda. – TheWithout referencing a numerical order or
other reference of order by category or within a category, the referendum questions to be voted
on shall be arranged on the official ballot in the following order:
            (1)     Proposed amendments to the North Carolina Constitution, in the
                    chronological order in which the proposals were approved by the General
                    Assembly. Proposed amendments shall be designated by only the short
                    caption provided by the Constitutional Amendments Publication Commission
                    under Article 4A of Chapter 147 of the General Statutes.phrase
                    "Constitutional Amendment" prior to setting forth the referendum question.
            (2)     Other referenda to be voted on by all voters in the State, in the chronological
                    order in which the proposals were approved by the General Assembly.
            (3)     Referenda to be voted on by fewer than all the voters in the State, in the
                    chronological order of the acts by which the referenda were properly
                    authorized."
            SECTION 1.(b) This section is effective when it becomes law and applies to ballots
used in the 2018 general election and thereafter. No numerical order or other reference of order
for referenda, by category or within a category, shall appear on the 2018 general election ballot.
Any captions adopted by the Constitutional Amendments Publication Commission pursuant to
G.S. 147-54.10(a) prior to this bill becoming law are null and void and shall not appear on the
ballot used in the 2018 general election.
            SECTION 2. G.S. 147-54.10(a) reads as rewritten:
    "(a) At least 75 days before an election in which a proposed amendment to the
Constitution, or a revised or new Constitution, is to be voted on, the Commission shall prepare
an explanation of the amendment, revision, or new Constitution in simple and commonly used
language. The explanation shall include a short caption reflecting the contents,that shall not
include a numerical or other reference of order, to be used on the ballot and the printed summary."




                                        *H3-v-3*
           SECTION 3. Except as otherwise provided, this act is effective when it becomes
law.
           In the General Assembly read three times and ratified this the 24th day of July, 2018.


                                          s/ Philip E. Berger
                                             President Pro Tempore of the Senate


                                          s/ Tim Moore
                                             Speaker of the House of Representatives


                                             VETO Roy Cooper
                                             Governor


           Became law notwithstanding the objections of the Governor at 11:55 a.m. this 4th day
of August, 2018.

                                          s/ Sarah Lang Holland
                                             Senate Principal Clerk




Page 2                               Session Law 2018-131                           House Bill 3
