A BILL TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT TO PROVIDE THAT A MOTORCYCLE LEARNER'S PERMIT OR MOTORCYCLE
ENDORSEMENT ARE NOT REQUIRED TO OPERATE CERTAIN ANTIQUE MOTOR
SCOOTERS.
The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts:
SECTION 1. G.S. 20-7(a1) reads as rewritten:
"(a1) Motorcycles and Mopeds. – ToExcept as otherwise provided in this subsection, to
drive a motorcycle, a person shall have one of the following:
(1)    A full provisional license with a motorcycle learner's permit.
(2)    A regular drivers license with a motorcycle learner's permit.
(3)    A full provisional license with a motorcycle endorsement.
(4)    A regular drivers license with a motorcycle endorsement.
Subsection (a2) of this section sets forth the requirements for a motorcycle learner's permit. To
obtain a motorcycle endorsement, a person shall pay the fee set in subsection (i) of this section. In
addition, to obtain an endorsement, a person age 18 or older shall demonstrate competence to
drive a motorcycle by passing a knowledge test concerning motorcycles, and by passing a road test
or providing proof of successful completion of one of the following:
(1)    The North Carolina Motorcycle Safety Education Program Basic Rider Course
or Experienced Rider Course.
(2)    Any course approved by the Commissioner consistent with the instruction
provided through the Motorcycle Safety Instruction Program established under
G.S. 115D-72.
A person less than 18 years of age shall demonstrate competence to drive a motorcycle by
passing a knowledge test concerning motorcycles and providing proof of successful completion of
one of the following:
(1)    Repealed by Session Laws 2012-85, s. 1, effective July 1, 2012.
(2)    The North Carolina Motorcycle Safety Education Program Basic Rider Course
or Experienced Rider Course.
(3)    Any course approved by the Commissioner consistent with the instruction
provided through the Motorcycle Safety Instruction Program established under
G.S. 115D-72.
A person less than 18 years of age with a motorcycle endorsement may not drive a motorcycle
with a passenger.
Neither a drivers license nor a motorcycle endorsement is required to drive a moped. Neither a
motorcycle learner's permit nor a motorcycle endorsement are required to drive a motor scooter
that (i) was manufactured prior to January 1, 1960, and (ii) has a motor that does not exceed 150
cubic centimeters piston displacement and produces more than eight horsepower."
SECTION 2. This act is effective when it becomes law.