A BILL TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT TO ENACT THE HURRICANE FLORENCE EMERGENCY RESPONSE ACT.
The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts:
PART I. TITLE OF ACT
SECTION 1.1. This act shall be known as "The Hurricane Florence Emergency
Response Act."
PART II. LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS
DAMAGE CAUSED BY HURRICANE FLORENCE
SECTION 2.1.(a) The General Assembly finds that Hurricane Florence was one of
the strongest storms to form in the Atlantic Ocean in the history of North Carolina, reaching wind
speeds of up to 140 miles an hour and covering 500 miles; making landfall on September 14,
2018; causing heavy rainfall, record flooding, high storm surge, and dozens of deaths in the State
as of the date of this act; and necessitating the declaration of a State of Emergency for the State
by the Governor and a Major Disaster Declaration by the President of the United States for
multiple counties in the State.
SECTION 2.1.(b) The General Assembly finds that as a result of Hurricane Florence
the following has occurred:
(1)     Central and southeastern North Carolina suffered significant damage to public
and private property.
(2)     Essential utility services and systems and other critical infrastructure have
been seriously disrupted.
(3)     Over 880,000 people have lost power, thousands of people have been
displaced from their homes, and 1,600 roads have been closed.
(4)     Riverine flooding began at the start of Hurricane Florence, and the effects
continue to be felt across the State. Several large rivers reached and exceeded
major flooding levels.
(5)     As of the date of this act, twenty-eight of the State's counties have been
declared a major disaster by the President of the United States under the
Stafford Act (P.L. 93-288), with others requested and pending approval.
(6)     North Carolinians have lost their lives, their loved ones, their homes, their
communities, their schools and houses of worship, their life savings, their
businesses and places of employment, their possessions, their pets, and their
ways of life.
(7)     Entire towns throughout eastern North Carolina were flooded to the rooftops
as the record storm surge combined with water levels of rivers and streams
crested at flood-stage heights far beyond those ever seen before in this State.
(8)     Thirty-four states assisted North Carolina in addressing the devastation caused
by Hurricane Florence.
(9)     Thousands of emergency responders, National Guard members, and other
volunteers worked to respond and assist disaster areas during and after the
time the storm made landfall.
(10)    Swift action by the General Assembly is necessary to provide relief to and
facilitate recovery efforts for the citizens of North Carolina devastated from
the Hurricane.
(11)    Assessments from the damages resulting from Hurricane Florence are
ongoing, and Public Assistance projects are in planning stages to repair
facilities and roads, remove debris, and otherwise effectuate cleanup and
repair.
(12)    Further assistance by the General Assembly will be needed on behalf of the
people and local governments who have suffered damage to public buildings,
roads, wastewater treatment plants, and other critical infrastructure.
PART III. CREATION OF HURRICANE FLORENCE DISASTER RECOVERY FUND
SECTION 3.1.(a) The Hurricane Florence Disaster Recovery Fund is established.
The purpose of the Fund is to provide necessary and appropriate relief and assistance from the
effects of Hurricane Florence, consistent with the provisions of this act, subsequent legislation
addressing the effects of Hurricane Florence. The Fund shall be maintained as a special fund and
administered by the Office of State Budget and Management or by another State agency, as
determined by the Governor, to carry out the provisions of this and subsequent acts necessitated
as a result of Hurricane Florence. All State and federal funds appropriated for Hurricane Florence
relief and recovery efforts shall be budgeted and accounted for in the Fund established in this
section.
SECTION 3.1.(b) Funds shall be drawn from the Fund only as needed upon
justification by a State agency as evidence of the need for funds related to Hurricane Florence
recovery efforts.
SECTION 3.1.(c) Funds in the Fund that are not expended, made subject to an
encumbrance, or disbursed shall remain available to implement the provisions of this act and
subsequent acts necessitated as a result of Hurricane Florence until the General Assembly directs
the reversion of the unexpended funds. Funds received by a State agency from the Fund that are
not expended, made subject to an encumbrance, or disbursed to another entity at the end of each
fiscal year shall revert to the Fund. Funds received by a non-State entity from the Fund that, after
three years, are not expended, made subject to an encumbrance, or disbursed to a subgrantee shall
be returned to the Fund.
PART IV. FUNDING OF DISASTER RELIEF
APPROPRIATIONS AND ALLOCATIONS OF FUNDS FOR DISASTER RELIEF
SECTION 4.1. Notwithstanding G.S. 143C-4-2, the State Controller shall transfer
the sum of fifty-six million five hundred thousand dollars ($56,500,000) for the 2018-2019 fiscal
year from the Savings Reserve in the General Fund to the Hurricane Florence Disaster Recovery
Fund and these funds are appropriated within the Fund and shall be allocated as follows:
(1)      Six million five hundred thousand dollars ($6,500,000) to the Department of
Public Instruction to supplement or replace lost compensation of school lunch
employees due to school closures resulting from Hurricane Florence.
(2)      Fifty million dollars ($50,000,000) for the following purposes related to
Hurricane Florence:
a.      To provide the State match for federal disaster assistance programs.
b.      To pay for the costs and the relief and assistance authorized by
G.S. 166A-19.42(b). This sub-subdivision applies to the North
Carolina counties that are or become designated under a major disaster
declaration by the President of the United States under the Stafford
Act (P.L. 93-288) as a result of Hurricane Florence.
EACH APPROPRIATION AND ALLOCATION IS MAXIMUM AND CONDITIONAL
SECTION 4.2. The appropriations and allocations made in this act are for maximum
amounts necessary to implement this act. Savings shall be effected where the total amounts
appropriated or allocated are not required to implement this act.
APPROPRIATION OF FEDERAL FUNDS
SECTION 4.3. Appropriation/Federal Funds. – Funds received on or after
September 13, 2018, under the federal Stafford Act (P.L. 93-288) and other federal disaster
assistance programs for State disasters as a result of Hurricane Florence are appropriated in the
amounts provided in the notifications of award from the federal government or any entity acting
on behalf of the federal government to administer federal disaster recovery funds. The Office of
State Budget and Management and affected State agencies shall report all notifications of award
to the Joint Legislative Commission on Governmental Operations and the Fiscal Research
Division of the General Assembly.
PART V. IMPLEMENTATION OF ACT
INVOLVEMENT OF HISTORICALLY UNDERUTILIZED BUSINESSES
SECTION 5.1. It is the intent of the General Assembly that, during this time of
rebuilding and relief efforts, each State agency should strive to acquire goods and services from
historically underutilized business vendors, whether directly as principal contractors or indirectly
as subcontractors or otherwise.
LEGISLATIVE REVIEW OF FEDERAL FUNDING AND REMAINING UNMET
NEEDS
SECTION 5.2. It is the intent of the General Assembly to review in 2018 and 2019
the funds appropriated by Congress for disaster relief and to consider actions needed to address
any remaining unmet needs. It is also the intent of the General Assembly to review the adequacy
of the measures funded by Section 4.1 of this act at that time.
ELECTIONS RELIEF
SECTION 5.3.(a) In response to Hurricane Florence and its aftermath, for the
November 2018 election only, the following shall apply:
(1)     Notwithstanding G.S. 163A-865(d), 163A-883, and 163A-884, applications
for voter registration for the November 2018 election may be submitted until
5:00 P.M. on October 15, 2018. If the application for registration is submitted
by mail, the application shall be postmarked no later than October 15, 2018.
If the application for voter registration is submitted by facsimile transmission
or transmission of a scanned document, a permanent copy of the completed,
signed form shall be delivered to the county board of elections no later than
October 20, 2018.
(2)     For any site that has previously been designated a one-stop site for absentee
ballots to be applied for and cast during the period required by
G.S. 163A-1300(b) for the November 2018 election under G.S. 163A-1303, a
county board of elections by unanimous vote may provide for a substitution
of the one-stop site, provided that the change is solely to substitute a one-stop
site that was damaged by Hurricane Florence or made otherwise inaccessible
or impractical for use as a result of damage from Hurricane Florence.
(3)     A county board of elections may adopt a resolution altering voting places for
the November 2018 election, provided that the change is solely to substitute a
voting place that was damaged by Hurricane Florence or made otherwise
inaccessible or impractical for use as a result of damage from Hurricane
Florence. Notwithstanding G.S. 163A-1045(a) and any other notice
requirements provided in statute, the county board shall provide notice of the
change in location in the most expedient manner possible. This notice may be
distributed through public service announcements, print, radio, television,
online, and social media. If necessary to alter a voting place for a precinct that
was damaged by Hurricane Florence or made otherwise inaccessible or
impractical for use as a result of damage from Hurricane Florence, the county
board may also make changes as provided in G.S. 163A-1047, 163A-1048,
and 163A-1049.
SECTION 5.3.(b) Subsection (a) of this section (i) is effective when it becomes law,
(ii) applies only in the counties designated under a major disaster declaration by the President of
the United States under the Stafford Act (P.L. 93-288) as a result of Hurricane Florence as of
October 2, 2018, and (iii) applies for the November 2018 election only.
SECTION 5.3.(c) County boards of elections shall educate the public, particularly
individuals impacted or displaced by Hurricane Florence, about voting in the November 2018
election as follows:
(1)     Counties that maintain a board of elections Web site shall include information
on that Web site about:
a.      Options to register to vote, including same day registration during the
early voting period, and how to determine residency for voting
purposes.
b.      Options to vote in the November 2018 election, including mail-in
absentee voting and early one-stop voting. Information shall include
locations and times of early one-stop voting.
(2)     When publishing notices of elections under G.S. 163A-769(8) for the 2018
general election, the notice shall include a brief statement regarding how to
obtain information on voting for individuals impacted or displaced by
Hurricane Florence.
SECTION 5.3.(d) The Bipartisan State Board of Elections and Ethics Enforcement
shall educate the public, particularly individuals impacted or displaced by Hurricane Florence,
about voting in the November 2018 election. The State Board shall:
(1)     Include on its Web site information about:
a.      Options to register to vote, including same day registration during the
early voting period, and how to determine residency for voting
purposes.
b.      Options to vote in the November 2018 election, including mail-in
absentee voting and early one-stop voting.
(2)     Distribute information about the options to register to vote, including same
day registration during the early voting period, and options to vote in the
November 2018 election, including mail-in absentee voting and early one-stop
voting to State agencies, shelters, groups, and other organizations serving
persons impacted or displaced by Hurricane Florence.
(3)     Coordinate with the State and federal agencies to identify and notify as many
persons as possible displaced by Hurricane Florence about the options to
register to vote, including same day registration during the early voting period
and options to vote in the November 2018 election, including mail-in absentee
voting and early one-stop voting. When practicable, the State Board shall
provide county specific information as to early one-stop voting locations and
times.
(4)     Disseminate information about the options to register to vote, including same
day registration during the early voting period and options to vote in the
November 2018 election, including mail-in absentee voting and early one-stop
voting. Information may be distributed through public service
announcements, print, radio, television, online, and social media.
(5)     Assist any county board of elections altering one-stop sites and voting places
for the November 2018 election under subsection (a) of this section in
educating the public on the changes.
SECTION 5.3.(e) Notwithstanding G.S. 163A-1535 and G.S. 163A-1520, there is
appropriated from the cash balance in Budget Code 68025 in the Bipartisan State Board of
Elections and Ethics Enforcement the sum of four hundred thousand dollars ($400,000) for the
purpose of implementing this section. Expenditures of this appropriation are not subject to the
provisions of Article 3 and Article 8 of Chapter 143 of the General Statutes.
MOSQUITO VECTOR POPULATION CONTROL
SECTION 5.4. It is the intent of the General Assembly to prevent large populations
of floodwater mosquitoes from emerging following Hurricane Florence, as this could adversely
impact the public health by hindering the State's response and recovery efforts and increasing the
number of vector-borne illnesses. To that end, the General Assembly encourages the Department
of Health and Human Services, Division of Public Health, to continue to work with local health
departments to expedite mosquito control efforts in counties that are or become part of a disaster
declaration by the President of the United States under the Stafford Act (P.L. 93-288) as a result
of Hurricane Florence. For purposes of this section, mosquito control efforts include mosquito
abatement activities, integrated mosquito management activities, education regarding mosquito
bite avoidance, and the purchase and distribution of materials for personal prevention measures.
WAIVER OF CERTAIN DMV FEES
SECTION 5.5.(a) Notwithstanding G.S. 20-14, 20-37.7, 20-85, and 20-88.03, the
Governor may waive any fees assessed by the Division of Motor Vehicles under those sections
for the following:
(1)     A duplicate drivers license, duplicate commercial drivers license, or duplicate
special identification card.
(2)     A special identification card issued to a person for the first time.
(3)     An application for a duplicate or corrected certificate of title.
(4)     A replacement registration plate.
(5)     An application for a duplicate registration card.
(6)     Late payment of a motor vehicle registration renewal fee.
SECTION 5.5.(b) The waiver authorized under subsection (a) of this section only
applies to residents of counties impacted by Hurricane Florence, as determined by the Governor.
A resident is allowed a refund of any fee assessed and collected by the Division of Motor Vehicles
and waived pursuant to this section. The Division shall post notice of the availability of a refund
on its Web site.
SECTION 5.5.(c) This section is effective when it becomes law and applies to fees
assessed or collected on or after September 13, 2018. This section expires December 31, 2018.
WAIVER OF HOMEOWNERS RECOVERY FEE
SECTION 5.6.(a) Notwithstanding G.S. 87-15.6, the Governor may waive the fee
assessed by city and county building inspectors and credited to the Homeowners Recovery Fund
for the reimbursement of homeowners suffering reimbursable losses in constructing or altering a
single-family residential dwelling unit.
SECTION 5.6.(b) The waiver authorized under subsection (a) of this section only
applies to residents of counties impacted by Hurricane Florence, as determined by the Governor.
A permit applicant is allowed a refund of any fee assessed and collected by city and county
building inspectors and waived pursuant to this section. A city or county subject to this section
shall post notice of the availability of a refund on its Web site.
SECTION 5.6.(c) This section is effective when it becomes law and applies to
applications for issuance of a permit subject to the Homeowners Recovery Fund fee that were
received on or after September 13, 2018. This section expires December 31, 2018.
ADDITIONAL LIMITATIONS ON USE OF FUNDS
SECTION 5.7. The Governor shall ensure that funds appropriated in this act are
expended in a manner that does not adversely affect any person's or entity's eligibility for federal
funds that are made available, or that are anticipated to be made available, as a result of Hurricane
Florence. The Governor shall also, to the extent practicable, avoid using State funds to cover
costs that will be, or likely will be, covered by federal funds.
PART VI. EFFECTIVE DATE
SECTION 6.1. Except as otherwise provided, this act is effective when it becomes
law.