A SENATE RESOLUTION ADOPTING THE PERMANENT RULES OF THE SENATE FOR
THE 2018 THIRD EXTRA SESSION OF THE 2017 GENERAL ASSEMBLY.
Be it resolved by the Senate:
SECTION 1. The permanent rules of the 2017 Regular Session, with the following
amendments, are the rules governing the 2018 Third Extra Session of the General Assembly:
RULE 32. List of standing/select committees. – The standing committees shall be:
Appropriations/Base Budget
Education/Higher Education
Finance
Rules and Operations of the Senate
All committees shall be comprised of the members who were appointed to those
committees during the 2017 Regular Session.
RULE 40. Introduction of bills. – Every bill filed for introduction shall contain on
the Senate e-jacket the title of the document and the name of the Senator or Senators sponsoring
it. The Senate e-jacket shall be delivered by the primary sponsor of the document, or by that
member's legislative assistant, with the prescribed authorization form signed by the primary
sponsor and by that member's legislative assistant, to the Office of the Senate Principal Clerk.
RULE 40.1. Limitation on introduction and consideration of resolutions and
bills. – The only resolutions that may be introduced or considered in the Senate are resolutions
establishing the rules governing the Third Extra Session and adjourning the Third Extra Session
sine die. The only bills, parts of bills, or amendments to bills that may be introduced or considered
in the Senate are bills, parts of bills, or amendments to bills addressing disaster recovery related
to Hurricane Florence.
RULE 41. (Reserved).
RULE 42. Reference of appropriation and finance bills. – (a) All bills introduced
in the Senate providing for appropriations from the State, or any subdivision thereof, or waiving
fees or other revenues payable to the State, its agencies, its licensing boards, or any of its
subdivisions shall, before being considered by the Senate, be referred to the Committee on
Appropriations/Base Budget and bills referred to other committees carrying any such provisions
shall be reported to the Senate as being bills to be referred to the Appropriations/Base Budget
Committee before proper action may be taken by the Senate.
RULE 43. First reading; reference to committee. – All bills introduced and all
House bills received upon a message from the House of Representatives, upon presentation to
the Senate, shall be read in the regular order of business by their number and title, which shall
constitute the first reading of the bill on the day on which they are received. The Chair of the
Committee on Rules and Operations of the Senate or the President Pro Tempore may refer to a
Senate committee all bills introduced in the Senate or received from the House of
Representatives. Upon the referral being made, the Chair of the Committee on Rules and
Operations of the Senate shall notify the Principal Clerk of the Senate of the referral, and the
Reading Clerk shall announce the referral of the bill. The Principal Clerk shall inform the
Presiding Officer of the referral. The title and referral shall be entered upon the Journal. Bills
may be referred to more than one committee serially.
RULE 43.1. Second reading. – All bills reported by committee shall be placed before
the Senate for second reading and immediate consideration upon passage.
RULE 45.1. Action on amendment or committee substitute. – If any committee
recommends adoption of an amendment or committee substitute of a bill or resolution, the
amendment or committee substitute shall be considered adopted upon the reading of the
committee report. The bill or resolution, as amended, or its adopted committee substitute may be
placed on the calendar for the same legislative day or re-referred if the bill or resolution was
serially referred. The committee substitute's original bill or resolution shall lie on the table.
RULE 50. Third reading requirements. – When a bill or resolution has passed its
second reading, it shall be placed on the calendar for immediate consideration on its third reading,
unless prohibited by Section 23 of Article II of the North Carolina Constitution.
RULE 56.1. Amendments and committee substitutes adopted by the House to
bills originating in the Senate. – (a) Whenever the House has adopted an amendment or a
committee substitute for a bill originating in the Senate and has returned the bill to the Senate for
concurrence in that amendment or committee substitute, the Senate may concur in that
amendment or committee substitute on the same legislative day.
RULE 59. (Reserved).
RULE 59.2. Vetoed bills. – (a) The Principal Clerk, or in the Clerk's absence an
employee designated by the Principal Clerk, is designated the Senate Officer to receive bills
vetoed by the Governor. If the veto message is received on a day when the Senate is in session,
it may be read in the Senate on the day of its receipt. If the veto message is received on a day
when the Senate is not in session, or if it was not read on the legislative day when it was received,
it shall be read on the next legislative day.
(b)     Upon a veto message's being read in the Senate, the Chair of the Committee
on Rules and Operations of the Senate, or in the absence of the Chair, the President Pro Tempore
of the Senate shall either refer the bill and the Governor's objections and veto message to
committee or place the bill on the calendar for a day certain.
SECTION 2. This resolution is effective upon adoption.