                     GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF NORTH CAROLINA
                          SECOND EXTRA SESSION 2018

                                        HOUSE BILL 3
                                        RATIFIED BILL


AN ACT TO AMEND THE CONSTITUTION OF NORTH CAROLINA TO PROVIDE FOR
  NONPARTISAN JUDICIAL MERIT COMMISSIONS FOR THE NOMINATION AND
  RECOMMENDATION OF NOMINEES WHEN FILLING VACANCIES IN THE OFFICE
  OF JUSTICE OR JUDGE OF THE GENERAL COURT OF JUSTICE AND TO MAKE
  OTHER CONFORMING CHANGES TO THE CONSTITUTION.

The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts:

            SECTION 1. Article IV of the North Carolina Constitution is amended by adding a
new section to read:
"Sec. 23. Merit selection; judicial vacancies.
    (1)     All vacancies occurring in the offices of Justice or Judge of the General Court of
Justice shall be filled as provided in this section. Appointees shall hold their places until the next
election following the election for members of the General Assembly held after the appointment
occurs, when elections shall be held to fill those offices. When the vacancy occurs on or after the
sixtieth day before the next election for members of the General Assembly and the term would
expire on December 31 of that same year, the Chief Justice shall appoint to fill that vacancy for
the unexpired term of the office.
    (2)     In filling any vacancy in the office of Justice or Judge of the General Court of Justice,
individuals shall be nominated on merit by the people of the State to fill that vacancy. In a manner
prescribed by law, nominations shall be received from the people of the State by a nonpartisan
commission established under this section, which shall evaluate each nominee without regard to
the nominee's partisan affiliation, but rather with respect to whether that nominee is qualified or
not qualified to fill the vacant office, as prescribed by law. The evaluation of each nominee of
people of the State shall be forwarded to the General Assembly, as prescribed by law. The
General Assembly shall recommend to the Governor, for each vacancy, at least two of the
nominees deemed qualified by a nonpartisan commission under this section. For each vacancy,
within 10 days after the nominees are presented, the Governor shall appoint the nominee the
Governor deems best qualified to serve from the nominees recommended by the General
Assembly.
    (3)     The Nonpartisan Judicial Merit Commission shall consist of no more than nine
members whose appointments shall be allocated between the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court,
the Governor, and the General Assembly, as prescribed by law. The General Assembly shall, by
general law, provide for the establishment of local merit commissions for the nomination of
judges of the Superior and District Court. Appointments to local merit commissions shall be
allocated between the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, the Governor, and the General
Assembly, as prescribed by law. Neither the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, the Governor,
nor the General Assembly shall be allocated a majority of appointments to a nonpartisan
commission established under this section.
    (4)     If the Governor fails to make an appointment within 10 days after the nominees are
presented by the General Assembly, the General Assembly shall elect, in joint session and by a



                                         *H3-v-3*
majority of the members of each chamber present and voting, an appointee to fill the vacancy in
a manner prescribed by law.
     (5)     If the General Assembly has adjourned sine die or for more than 30 days jointly as
provided under Section 20 of Article II of this Constitution, the Chief Justice shall have the
authority to appoint a qualified individual to fill a vacant office of Justice or Judge of the General
Court of Justice if any of the following apply:
             (a)     The vacancy occurs during the period of adjournment.
             (b)     The General Assembly adjourned without presenting nominees to the
                     Governor as required under subsection (2) of this section or failed to elect a
                     nominee as required under subsection (4) of this section.
             (c)     The Governor failed to appoint a recommended nominee under subsection (2)
                     of this section.
     (6)     Any appointee by the Chief Justice shall have the same powers and duties as any other
Justice or Judge of the General Court of Justice, when duly assigned to hold court in an interim
capacity, and shall serve until the earlier of:
             (a)     Appointment by the Governor.
             (b)     Election by the General Assembly.
             (c)     The first day of January succeeding the next election of the members of the
                     General Assembly, and such election shall include the office for which the
                     appointment was made.
However, no appointment by the Governor or election by the General Assembly to fill a judicial
vacancy shall occur after an election to fill that judicial office has commenced, as prescribed by
law."
             SECTION 2. Section 10 of Article IV of the North Carolina Constitution reads as
rewritten:
"Sec. 10. District Courts.
     (1)     The General Assembly shall, from time to time, divide the State into a convenient
number of local court districts and shall prescribe where the District Courts shall sit, but a District
Court must sit in at least one place in each county. District Judges shall be elected for each district
for a term of four years, in a manner prescribed by law. When more than one District Judge is
authorized and elected for a district, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court shall designate one
of the judges as Chief District Judge. Every District Judge shall reside in the district for which
he is elected.
     (2)     For each county, the senior regular resident Judge of the Superior Court serving the
county shall appoint from nominations submitted by the Clerk of the Superior Court of the
county, one or more Magistrates who shall be officers of the District Court. The initial term of
appointment for a magistrate shall be for two years and subsequent terms shall be for four years.
     (3)     The number of District Judges and Magistrates shall, from time to time, be determined
by the General Assembly. Vacancies in the office of District Judge shall be filled for the
unexpired term in a manner prescribed by law. Vacancies in the office of Magistrate shall be
filled for the unexpired term in the manner provided for original appointment to the office, unless
otherwise provided by the General Assembly."
             SECTION 3. Section 18 of Article IV of the North Carolina Constitution is amended
by adding a new subsection to read:
     "(3) Vacancies. All vacancies occurring in the office of District Attorney shall be filled by
appointment of the Governor, and the appointees shall hold their places until the next election
for members of the General Assembly that is held more than 60 days after the vacancy occurs,
when elections shall be held to fill the offices. When the unexpired term in which a vacancy has
occurred expires on the first day of January succeeding the next election for members of the
General Assembly, the Governor shall appoint to fill that vacancy for the unexpired term of the
office."

Page 2                                                                         House Bill 3-Ratified
            SECTION 4. Section 19 of Article IV of the North Carolina Constitution is repealed.
            SECTION 5. Subsection (5) of Section 22 of Article II of the North Carolina
Constitution reads as rewritten:
    "(5) Other exceptions. Every bill:
            (a)     In which the General Assembly makes an appointment or appointments to
                    public office and which contains no other matter;
            (b)     Revising the senate districts and the apportionment of Senators among those
                    districts and containing no other matter;
            (c)     Revising the representative districts and the apportionment of Representatives
                    among those districts and containing no other matter; or
            (d)     Revising the districts for the election of members of the House of
                    Representatives of the Congress of the United States and the apportionment
                    of Representatives among those districts and containing no other
                    matter,matter;
            (e)     Recommending a nominee or nominees to fill a vacancy in the office of Justice
                    and Judge of the General Court of Justice, in accordance with Section 23 of
                    Article IV of this Constitution and containing no other matter; or
            (f)     Electing a nominee or nominees to fill a vacancy in the office of Justice or
                    Judge of the General Court of Justice, in accordance with Section 23 of Article
                    IV of this Constitution and containing no other matter,
shall be read three times in each house before it becomes law and shall be signed by the presiding
officers of both houses."
            SECTION 6. The amendments set out in Sections 1 through 5 of this act shall be
submitted to the qualified voters of the State at a statewide general election to be held in
November of 2018, which election shall be conducted under the laws then governing elections
in the State. Ballots, voting systems, or both may be used in accordance with Chapter 163A of
the General Statutes. The question to be used in the voting systems and ballots shall be:
                    "[ ] FOR                                       [ ] AGAINST
            Constitutional amendment to change the process for filling judicial vacancies that
occur between judicial elections from a process in which the Governor has sole appointment
power to a process in which the people of the State nominate individuals to fill vacancies by way
of a commission comprised of appointees made by the judicial, executive, and legislative
branches charged with making recommendations to the legislature as to which nominees are
deemed qualified; then the legislature will recommend at least two nominees to the Governor via
legislative action not subject to gubernatorial veto; and the Governor will appoint judges from
among these nominees."
            SECTION 7. If a majority of the votes cast on the question are in favor of the
amendment set out in Sections 1 through 5 of this act, the Bipartisan State Board of Elections
and Ethics Enforcement shall certify the amendment to the Secretary of State, who shall enroll
the amendment so certified among the permanent records of that office. The amendment becomes
effective upon certification and applies to vacancies occurring on or after the date of the general
election.




House Bill 3-Ratified                                                                       Page 3
         SECTION 8. Except as otherwise provided, this act is effective when it becomes
law.
         In the General Assembly read three times and ratified this the 27th day of August,
2018.


                                       s/ Philip E. Berger
                                          President Pro Tempore of the Senate


                                       s/ Tim Moore
                                          Speaker of the House of Representatives




Page 4                                                                House Bill 3-Ratified
