A BILL TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT TO REQUIRE PUBLIC SCHOOLS TO PROVIDE STUDENTS WITH
INFORMATION AND RESOURCES ON CHILD ABUSE AND NEGLECT,
INCLUDING SEXUAL ABUSE, TO APPROPRIATE FUNDS TO SUPPORT THE
ANONYMOUS SAFETY TIP LINE APPLICATION, AND TO MAKE CERTAIN
CHANGES TO UPDATE THE GENERAL STATUTES.
The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts:
PART I. POLICY ON ABUSE AND NEGLECT RESOURCES
SECTION 1.(a) G.S. 115C-12 is amended by adding a new subdivision to read:
"(46) Duty Regarding Abuse and Neglect. – Upon consideration and
recommendation by the Superintendent of Public Instruction, the State Board
of Education shall adopt a policy to be implemented by local boards of
education to address student awareness of child abuse and neglect, including
sexual abuse. This policy shall include a requirement that the local boards of
education provide students in grades six through 12 with a document at the
beginning of each school year that provides (i) the telephone number used
for reporting abuse to the department of social services in the county in
which the local school administrative unit is located, in accordance with
G.S. 7B-301, and (ii) information about the resources developed pursuant to
G.S. 115C-105.51, including the anonymous safety tip line application."
SECTION 1.(b) G.S. 115C-218.75(a) reads as rewritten:
"(a) Health and Safety Standards. – A charter school shall meet the same health and
safety requirements required of a local school administrative unit. The Department of Public
Instruction shall ensure that the following:
(1)     That charter schools provide parents and guardians with information about
meningococcal meningitis and influenza and their vaccines at the beginning
of every school year. This information shall include the causes, symptoms,
and how meningococcal meningitis and influenza are spread and the places
where parents and guardians may obtain additional information and
vaccinations for their children.
(2)     The Department of Public Instruction shall also ensure that That charter
schools provide parents and guardians with information about cervical
cancer, cervical dysplasia, human papillomavirus, and the vaccines available
to prevent these diseases. This information shall be provided at the
beginning of the school year to parents of children entering grades five
through 12. This information shall include the causes and symptoms of these
diseases, how they are transmitted, how they may be prevented by
vaccination, including the benefits and possible side effects of vaccination,
and the places where parents and guardians may obtain additional
information and vaccinations for their children.
(3)     The Department of Public Instruction shall also ensure that That charter
schools provide students in grades seven through 12 with information
annually on the preventable risks for preterm birth in subsequent
pregnancies, including induced abortion, smoking, alcohol consumption, the
use of illicit drugs, and inadequate prenatal care.
(4)     The Department of Public Instruction shall also ensure that That charter
schools provide students in grades nine through 12 with information
annually on the manner in which a parent may lawfully abandon a newborn
baby with a responsible person, in accordance with G.S. 7B-500.
(5)     The Department of Public Instruction shall also ensure that That the
guidelines for individual diabetes care plans adopted by the State Board of
Education under G.S. 115C-12(31) are implemented in charter schools in
which students with diabetes are enrolled and that charter schools otherwise
comply with the provisions of G.S. 115C-375.3.
(6)     The Department of Public Instruction shall ensure that That charter schools
comply with G.S. 115C-375.2A. The board of directors of a charter school
shall provide the school with a supply of emergency epinephrine
auto-injectors necessary to carry out the provisions of G.S. 115C-375.2A.
(7)     That the policy addressing student awareness of child abuse and neglect,
including sexual abuse, adopted by the State Board of Education under
G.S. 115C-12(46), is implemented in charter schools."
SECTION 1.(c) G.S. 115C-238.66 reads as rewritten:
"§ 115C-238.66. Board of directors; powers and duties.
The board of directors shall have the following powers and duties:
...
(7)     Health and safety. – The board of directors shall require that the regional
school meet the same health and safety standards required of a local school
administrative unit.
The Department of Public Instruction shall ensure that regional schools
comply with G.S. 115C-375.2A. The board of directors of a regional school
shall provide the school with a supply of emergency epinephrine
auto-injectors necessary to carry out the provisions of G.S. 115C-375.2A.
The Department of Public Instruction shall also ensure that the policy
addressing student awareness of child abuse and neglect, including sexual
abuse, adopted by the State Board of Education under G.S. 115C-12(46), is
implemented in regional schools.
...."
PART II. ANONYMOUS TIP LINE APPLICATION
SECTION 2.1.(a) G.S. 115C-105.49(d) reads as rewritten:
"(d) The Department of Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, and in
collaboration with the Department of Public Instruction, Division of Safe and Healthy Schools
Support, and the Center for Safer Schools Schools, shall provide guidance and
recommendations to local school administrative units on the types of multiple hazards to plan
and respond to, including intruders on school grounds."
SECTION 2.1.(b) G.S. 115C-105.49A reads as rewritten:
"§ 115C-105.49A. School Risk and Response Management System.
(a)     The Department of Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, and the
Center for Safer Schools in collaboration with the Department of Public Instruction and the
Center for Safer Schools, shall construct and maintain a statewide School Risk and Response
Management System (SRRMS). The system shall fully integrate and leverage existing data and
applications that support school risk planning, exercises, monitoring, and emergency response
via 911 dispatch.
(b)     In constructing the SRRMS, the Division of Emergency Management Management
of the Department of Public Safety, in collaboration with the Department of Public Instruction
and the Center for Safer Schools Schools, shall leverage the existing enterprise risk
management database, the School Risk Management Planning tool managed by the
Division.Division of Emergency Management. The Division shall also leverage the local
school administrative unit schematic diagrams of school facilities. Where technically feasible,
the SRRMS shall integrate any anonymous tip lines established pursuant to G.S. 115C-105.51
and any 911-initiated panic alarm systems authorized as part of a SRMP pursuant to
G.S. 115C-47(40). The Division and the Center for Safer Schools shall collaborate with the
Department of Public Instruction Instruction, the Center for Safer Schools, and the North
Carolina 911 Board in the design, implementation, and maintenance of the SRRMS.
(c)     All data and information acquired and stored in the SRRMS as provided in
subsections (a) and (b) of this section are not considered public records as the term "public
record" is defined under G.S. 132-1 and shall not be subject to inspection and examination
under G.S. 132-6."
SECTION 2.1.(c) G.S. 115C-105.51 reads as rewritten:
"§ 115C-105.51. Anonymous tip lines and monitoring and response applications.
(a)     Each local school administrative unit is encouraged to develop and operate an
anonymous tip line, in coordination with local law enforcement and social services agencies, to
receive anonymous information on internal or external risks to the school population, school
buildings, and school-related activities. The Department of Public Safety, in consultation with
the Department of Public Instruction Instruction, in consultation with the Department of Public
Safety, may develop standards and guidelines for the development, operation, and staffing of
tip lines. Local school administrative units may use the anonymous tip line application
developed pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, or another application that meets standards
and guidelines developed by the Department of Public Instruction, to achieve the purposes of
this subsection.
(b)     The Department of Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, and the
Center for Safer Schools, in collaboration with the The Department of Public Instruction,
Division of Safe and Healthy Schools Support, and the Center for Safer Schools, in
collaboration with the Department of Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, shall
implement and maintain an anonymous safety tip line application for purposes of receiving
anonymous student information on internal or external risks to the school population, school
buildings, and school-related activities.activities, and for purposes of receiving student
information on suspected abuse and neglect. Local school administrative units shall inform
students about the application and provide opportunities for students to learn about its purpose
and function. Each local school administrative unit shall work with the Department of Public
Instruction, Division of Safe and Healthy Schools Support, and the Center for Safer Schools to
ensure that employees of the local school administrative unit receive adequate training in its
operation.
(c)     The Department of Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, and the
Center for Safer Schools, in collaboration with the Department of Public Instruction and the
North Carolina 911 Board, in collaboration with the Department of Public Instruction, Division
of Safe and Healthy Schools Support, and the Center for Safer Schools, shall implement and
maintain a statewide panic alarm system for the purposes of launching real-time 911 messaging
to public safety answering points of internal and external risks to the school population, school
buildings, and school-related activities. The Department of Public Safety, in consultation with
the Department of Public Instruction and the North Carolina 911 Board, may develop standards
and guidelines for the operations and use of the panic alarm tool.
(d)     The Department of Public Safety Instruction and the Department of Public Safety
shall ensure that the anonymous safety tip line application is integrated with and supports the
statewide School Risk and Response Management System (SRRMS) as provided in
G.S. 115C-105.49A. Where technically feasible and cost efficient, the Department of Public
Safety is and the Department of Public Instruction are encouraged to implement a single
solution supporting both the anonymous safety tip line application and panic alarm system.
(e)     All data and information acquired and stored by the anonymous safety tip line
application are not considered public records as the term "public record" is defined under
G.S. 132-1 and shall not be subject to inspection and examination under G.S. 132-6.
(f)     Notwithstanding subsection (e) of this section, the Division Department of Public
Instruction, Division of Safe and Healthy Schools Support, may collect the annual aggregate
number and type of tips sent to the anonymous tip line. The collection of this aggregate data
shall not have any identifying information on the reporter of the tip, including, but not limited
to, the school where the incident was reported and the date the tip was reported."
SECTION 2.1.(d) G.S. 115C-105.52 reads as rewritten:
"§ 115C-105.52. School crisis kits.
The Department of Public Instruction, Instruction and the North Carolina Center for Safer
Schools, in consultation with the Department of Public Safety through the North Carolina
Center for Safer Schools, Safety, may develop and adopt policies on the placement of school
crisis kits in schools and on the contents of those kits. The kits should include, at a minimum,
basic first-aid supplies, communications devices, and other items recommended by the
International Association of Chiefs of Police.
The principal of each school, in coordination with the law enforcement agencies that are
part of the local board of education's School Risk Management Plan, may place one or more
crisis kits at appropriate locations in the school."
SECTION 2.2. Section 8.26(n) of S.L. 2015-241 reads as rewritten:
"SECTION 8.26.(n) By July 1, 2016, the Department of Public Safety shall implement an
anonymous safety tip line application and a statewide panic alarm system as required under
G.S. 115C-105.51, as amended by subsection (d) of this section.G.S. 115C-105.51. By July 1,
2018, the Department of Public Instruction shall implement an anonymous safety tip line
application as required under G.S. 115C-105.51."
PART III. APPROPRIATION
SECTION 3. There is appropriated from the General Fund to the Department of
Public Instruction the sum of seven hundred eight thousand four hundred twenty dollars
($708,420) for the 2017-2018 fiscal year to support the anonymous safety tip line application
implemented by the Department of Public Instruction, Division of Safe and Healthy Schools
Support, and the Center for Safer Schools pursuant to G.S. 115C-105.51.
PART IV. EFFECTIVE DATE
SECTION 4. This act becomes effective July 1, 2017. Section 1 of this act applies
beginning with the 2018-2019 school year.