A BILL TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT TO PROVIDE COMPANY POLICE THE AUTHORITY TO ACTIVATE THEIR
BLUE LIGHT IN EMERGENCY SITUATIONS; TO DIRECT TRAFFIC ON ALL PUBLIC
ROADS ADJACENT TO THE FACILITY WHERE THEY ARE EMPLOYED; TO ENTER
INTO MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS WITH LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES;
AND TO PROVIDE ASSISTANCE TO LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES
UPON REQUEST REGARDLESS OF WHETHER A MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT IS IN
PLACE.
The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts:
SECTION 1. G.S. 74E-6 reads as rewritten:
"§ 74E-6. Oaths, powers, and authority of company police officers.
(a)     Requirements. – An individual who is commissioned as a company police officer must
take the oath of office required of a law enforcement officer before the individual assumes the
duties of a company police officer. The person in each company police agency who is responsible
for the agency's company police officers must be commissioned as a company police officer.
(b)     Categories. – The following three distinct classifications of company police officers are
established:
(1)     Campus Police Officers – Only those company police officers who are
employed by any college or university that is a constituent institution of The
University of North Carolina or any private college or university that is licensed
or exempted from licensure as prescribed by G.S. 116-15, and who are
employed by a campus police agency that was licensed pursuant to this Chapter
prior to the enactment of Chapter 74G of the General Statutes.
(2)     Railroad Police Officers – Those company police officers who are employed by
a certified rail carrier and commissioned as company police officers under this
Chapter.
(3)     Special Police Officers – All company police officers not designated as a
campus police officer or railroad police officer.
(c)     All Company Police. – Company police officers, while in the performance of their
duties of employment, have the same powers as municipal and county police officers to make
arrests for both felonies and misdemeanors and to charge for infractions on any of the following:
(1)     Real property owned by or in the possession and control of their employer.
(2)     Real property owned by or in the possession and control of a person who has
contracted with the employer to provide on-site company police security
personnel services for the property.
(3)     Any other real property while in continuous and immediate pursuit of a person
for an offense committed upon property described in subdivisions (1) or (2) of
this subsection.
(4)    Company police officers shall have, if duly authorized by the superior officer in
charge, the authority to carry concealed weapons pursuant to and in conformity
with G.S. 14-269(b)(4) and (5).
(5)    On all public roads adjacent to the facility where company police officers are
employed, if the facility is a public school, hospital, or airport. This includes the
authority to direct traffic on all public roads adjacent to a public school,
hospital, or airport where the company police officers are employed.
(6)    Company police officers shall have the authority to activate their blue light in
an emergency situation on a public roadway when they stop to assist a motorist
or to render assistance to a law enforcement officer or first responder, or in an
emergency situation.
(d)     Campus Police. – Campus police officers have the powers contained in subsection (c)
of this section and also have the powers in that subsection upon that portion of any public road or
highway passing through or immediately adjoining the property described in that subsection,
wherever located. The board of trustees of any college or university that qualifies as a campus
police agency pursuant to this Chapter may enter into a mutual aid agreement with the governing
board of a municipality or, with the consent of the county sheriff, a county to the same extent as a
municipal police department pursuant to Chapter 160A.
(e)     Railroad Police. – Railroad police officers have the powers contained in subsection (c)
and also have the powers and authority granted by federal law or by a regulation promulgated by
the United States Secretary of Transportation. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this
Chapter, the limitations on the power to make arrests contained in subsection (c) above, shall not
be applicable to railroad police officers commissioned by the Attorney General pursuant to the
authority of this Chapter.
(f)     Repealed by Session Laws 2005-231, s. 3, effective July 28, 2005.
(g)     Exclusive Authority. – Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the authority
granted to company police officers shall be limited to the provisions of this Chapter.
(h)     Mutual Aid Agreements. – All company police agencies that qualify pursuant to this
Chapter may enter into mutual aid agreements with the governing board of a municipality or, with
the consent of the county sheriff, a county to the same extent as a municipal police department
pursuant to Chapter 160A of the General Statutes.
(i)     As-Needed Assistance. – All company police may provide assistance to a law
enforcement agency at the request of the head of that agency such as the sheriff or chief of police
regardless of whether there is an agreement in place under subsection (h) of this section."
SECTION 2. This act is effective when it becomes law.