A BILL TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT AUTHORIZING A LOCAL BOARD OF EDUCATION AND THE STATE
HUMAN RESOURCES COMMISSION TO ESTABLISH BOTH PRIMARY AND
GENERAL ELECTIONS IN EVEN-NUMBERED YEARS AS PAID HOLIDAYS FOR
TEACHERS AND STATE EMPLOYEES.
The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts:
SECTION 1. G.S. 115C-84.2(b) reads as rewritten:
"(b) Limitations. – The following limitations apply when developing the school
calendar:
(1)     The total number of teacher workdays for teachers employed for a 10 month
term shall not exceed 195 days.
(2)     The calendar shall include at least 42 consecutive days when teacher
attendance is not required unless: (i) the school is a year-round school; or (ii)
the teacher is employed for a term in excess of 10 months. At the request of
the local board of education or of the principal of a school, a teacher may
elect to work on one of the 42 days when teacher attendance is not required
in lieu of another scheduled workday.
(3)     School shall not be held on Sundays.
(4)     The date of the primary election (the Tuesday after the first Monday in May
preceding the general election in even-numbered years), the date of the
general election (the Tuesday after the first Monday in November in
even-numbered years), and Veterans Day shall be a holiday for all public
school personnel and for all students enrolled in the public schools."
SECTION 2. G.S. 126-4(5) reads as rewritten:
"§ 126-4. Powers and duties of State Human Resources Commission.
Subject to the approval of the Governor, the State Human Resources Commission shall
establish policies and rules governing each of the following:
…
(5)     Hours and days of work, holidays, vacation, sick leave, and other matters
pertaining to the conditions of employment. The legal public holidays
established by the Commission as paid holidays for State employees shall
include the date of the primary election (the Tuesday after the first Monday
in May preceding the general election in even-numbered years), the date of
the general election (the Tuesday after the first Monday in November in
even-numbered years), Martin Luther King, Jr.'s Birthday and Veterans Day.
The Commission shall not provide for more than 12 paid holidays per year,
with three paid holidays being given for Christmas. However, in
even-numbered years, the Commission shall provide for 14 paid holidays,
with one additional paid holiday being given for the primary election and
one additional paid holiday being given for the general election in those
years.
…."
SECTION 3. This act is effective when it becomes law.