A BILL TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT TO MAKE VARIOUS CHANGES TO THE PRIVATE PROTECTIVE SERVICES
ACT AND THE ALARM SYSTEMS LICENSING ACT AND TO CREATE CERTAIN
FEES.
The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts:
SECTION 1. G.S. 74C-3 reads as rewritten:
"§ 74C-3. Private protective services profession defined.
(a)     As used in this Chapter, the term "private protective services profession" means and
includes the following:
…
(5a) Electronic countermeasures profession. – Any person, firm, association, or
corporation which for a fee or other valuable consideration discovers,
locates, or disengages by electronic, electrical, or mechanical means any
listening of the following:
a.      Listening or other monitoring equipment surreptitiously placed to
gather information concerning any individual, firm, association, or
corporation.
b.      Any device intended to block the transmission of any electronic
signal.
…
(10) Close personal protection. – Any individual, firm, association, or corporation
that, for a fee or other valuable consideration, provides or offers to provide
security measures to ensure the safety of a business executive, elected or
appointed public official, celebrity, or other individuals who may be exposed
to elevated personal risk due to employment, status, wealth, associations, or
geographical location.
(b)     "Private protective services" shall not include any of the following:
…
(18) A person under contract or employed by an occupational licensing board as
defined by G.S. 93B-1, while performing an investigation solely for that
board."
SECTION 2. G.S. 74C-5 reads as rewritten:
"§ 74C-5. Powers of the Board.
In addition to the powers conferred upon the Board elsewhere in this Chapter, the Board
shall have the power to do all of the following:
…
(13)     With the concurrence of the Secretary of Public Safety, issue, cease, and
desist letters regarding unlicensed activity.
(14) Subject to approval of the Governor and the Council of State, acquire, hold,
rent, encumber, alienate, and otherwise deal with real property in the same
manner as a private person or corporation. Any collateral pledged by the
Board for encumbrance is limited to the assets, income, and revenue of the
Board.
(15) Adopt rules establishing standards for the use of firearms or other weapons
approved by the Board.
(16) Adopt and publish a code of professional conduct for licensees, registrants,
certificate holders, and permit holders."
SECTION 3. G.S. 74C-7 reads as rewritten:
"§ 74C-7. Investigative powers of the Secretary of Public Safety.
The Secretary of Public Safety for the State of North Carolina shall have the power to
investigate or cause to be investigated any complaints, allegations, or suspicions of wrongdoing
or violations of this Chapter involving individuals licensed, unlicensed individuals, licensed
individuals, or individuals to be licensed,licensed under this Chapter. Any investigation
conducted pursuant to this section is confidential and is not subject to review under G.S. 132-1
until the investigation is complete and a report is presented to the Board. However, the report
may be released to the licensee after the investigation is complete but before the report is
presented to the Board. The Secretary shall retain the authority to enforce the provisions of this
Chapter and impose any penalty authorized by G.S. 74C-12(a) and G.S. 74C-17 against any
individual or entity who is under investigation for or charged with a violation of this Chapter,
including individuals and entities with lapsed or surrendered licenses or registrations."
SECTION 4. G.S. 74C-8 reads as rewritten:
"§ 74C-8. License requirements.
…
(c)     Qualifying Agent. – A business entity, other than a sole proprietorship, that engages
in private protective services is subject to all of the requirements listed in this subsection with
respect to a qualifying agent. For purposes of this Chapter, a "qualifying agent" is an individual
in a management position who is licensed under this Chapter and whose name and address have
been registered with the Director. The requirements are:
…
(3)     In the event that the qualifying agent upon whom the business entity relies in
order to do business ceases to perform his duties as qualifying agent, the
business entity shall notify the Director within 10 working days. The
business entity must obtain a substitute qualifying agent within 30 90 days
after the original qualifying agent ceases to serve as qualifying agent unless
the Board, in its discretion, extends this the 90-day period, for good cause,
for a period of time not to exceed three months.an additional 30 days upon
the filing of a petition by the business entity and upon a hearing by the
Board. The Board may require the payment of a late fee for a business entity
failing to obtain a substitute qualifying agent pursuant to the requirements of
this subdivision.
…
(f)     Issuance. – Upon a finding that the application is in proper form, the completion of
the background investigation, and the completion of an examination required by the Board, the
Director shall submit to the Board the application and the Director's recommendations. Upon
completion of the background investigation, the Director may issue a temporary license
pending approval of the application by the Board at the next regularly scheduled meeting. The
Board shall determine whether to approve or deny the application for a license. Upon approval
by the Board, a license will be issued to the applicant upon payment by the applicant of the
initial license fee and the required contribution to the Private Protective Services Education
Fund, and the filing of a certificate of liability insurance.insurance with the Board. The
applicant shall pay the initial license fee and make the required contribution to the Fund within
90 days from the date the applicant receives notice of pending licensure approval unless the
Board, in its discretion and for good cause, extends the 90-day period for an additional 30 days
upon the filing of a petition by the applicant and a hearing by the Board. The Board may
require the payment of a late fee for an applicant failing to pay the initial license fee or for
failing to make the contribution to the Fund pursuant to this subsection.
…."
SECTION 5. G.S. 74C-9 reads as rewritten:
"§ 74C-9. Form of license; term; renewal; posting; branch offices; not assignable; late
renewal fee.
…
(e)     The Board is authorized to charge reasonable application and license fees as
follows:
…
(7)     An application fee for a firearm registration permit for all applicants and for
licensees subject to G.S. 74C-13 not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00).
(8)     A new, renewal, replacement, or reissuance fee for a firearm registration
permit for all applicants and for licensees subject to G.S. 74C-13 not to
exceed thirty dollars ($30.00).
…
(16) A late fee for a business entity subject to G.S. 74C-8(c)(3) or an applicant
for licensure under G.S. 74C-8(f) not to exceed one hundred dollars
($100.00).
Except as provided in G.S. 74C-13(k), all fees collected pursuant to this section shall be
expended, under the direction of the Board, for the purpose of defraying the expenses of
administering this Chapter.
(f)     A license or trainee permit granted under the provisions of this Chapter may be
renewed by the Private Protective Services Board upon notification by the licensee or permit
holder to the Director of intended renewal, the payment of the proper fee, and evidence of a
policy of liability insurance policy as prescribed in G.S. 74C-10(e).
The renewal shall be finalized before the expiration date of the license. In no event will
renewal be granted more than three months after the date of expiration of a license or trainee
permit.
…."
SECTION 6. G.S. 74C-10 reads as rewritten:
"§ 74C-10. Certificate of liability insurance required; form and approval; suspension for
noncompliance.
…
(e)     No security guard and patrol, armored car, or special limited guard and patrol
license shall be issued under this Chapter unless the applicant files with the Board evidence of a
policy of liability insurance.insurance policy. The policy must provide for the following
minimum coverage: fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) because of bodily injury or death of one
person as a result of the negligent act or acts of the principal insured or his agents operating in
the course and scope of his employment; subject to said limit for one person, one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000) because of bodily injury or death of two or more persons as the
result of the negligent act or acts of the principal insured or his agents operating in the course
and scope of his or her agency; twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) because of injury to or
destruction of property of others as the result of the negligent act or acts of the principal insured
or his agents operating in the course and scope of his or her agency. If the licensee,a licensee or
a trainee supervised by a licensee, other than a security guard and patrol, armored car, or
special limited guard and patrol licensee, carries a firearm while engaged in private protective
services activities, the licensee or trainee shall obtain a policy of liability insurance policy with
a minimum coverage as specified above. A licensee or trainee is deemed to be "carrying a
firearm" for purposes of this section while engaged in private protective services if the licensee
or trainee has a firearm on the licensee's or trainee's person or in the automobile the licensee or
trainee is using to perform private protective services. A licensee may provide liability
insurance coverage for a trainee under the licensee's supervision; however, failure of the
licensee to provide coverage shall not exempt the trainee from the requirements of this section.
(e1) The Board shall approve the form, execution, and terms of the liability insurance
policy required pursuant to this section.
(f)      An insurance carrier shall have the right to cancel such policy ofa liability insurance
policy upon giving a 30-day notice to the Board. Provided, however, that such the cancellation
shall not affect any liability on the policy which that accrued prior thereto. The policy of
liability shall be approved by the Board as to form, execution, and terms thereon.
(g)      The holder of any trainee permit and personsPersons registered pursuant to
G.S. 74C-11 shall not be required to obtain a certificate of liability insurance.
…."
SECTION 7. G.S. 74C-12 reads as rewritten:
"§ 74C-12. Denial, suspension, or revocation of license, registration, or permit; duty to
report criminal arrests.
(a)      The Board may, after compliance with Chapter 150B of the General Statutes, deny,
suspend or revoke a license, certification, registration, or permit issued under this Chapter if it
is determined that the applicant, licensee, trainee, registrant, or permit holder has done any of
the following acts:
(1)      Made any false statement or given any false information in connection with
any application for a license, certification, registration, or permit or for the
renewal or reinstatement of a license, certification, registration, or permit.
…
(6)      Engaged in or permitted any employee to engage in a private protective
services profession when not lawfully in possession of a valid license or
registration issued under the provisions of this Chapter.
…
(9)      Committed an unlawful breaking or entering, assault, battery, or
kidnapping.kidnapping, or violated any State or federal firearms law.
…
(24) Fraudulently held himself or herself out as employed by or licensed by the
State Bureau of InvestigationDepartment of Public Safety or any other
governmental authority.
…
(33) Violated the code of professional conduct for licensees, registrants,
certificate holders, and permit holders adopted by the Board.
…."
SECTION 8. G.S. 74C-13 reads as rewritten:
"§ 74C-13. Armed licensee or registered employee required to have firearm registration
permit; firearms training.
(a)      It shall be unlawful for any person performing private protective services duties to
carry a firearm in the performance of those duties without first having met the qualifications of
this section and having been issued a firearm registration permit by the Board. A licensee or
proprietary employer described in G.S. 74C-3(b)(13) shall register any individual carrying a
firearm within 30 days of employment. Before engaging in any private protective services
activity, the individual shall receive any required training prescribed by the Board.Board,
unless specifically exempted from training pursuant to G.S. 74C-13.1.
…
(d2) A proprietary security organization that employs an armed security guard shall
submit to the Board an application for license on a form provided by the Board for that
purpose. A proprietary security organization shall renew its license every two years.
…
(h)     The Board and the Secretary of Public Safety shall establish a firearms training
program for licensees and registered employees to be conducted by agencies and institutions
approved by the Board and the Secretary of Public Safety. The Board and the Secretary of
Public Safety may approve training programs conducted by a contract security company and
the security department of a proprietary security organization, if the contract security company
or security department of a proprietary security organization offers the courses listed in
subdivision (1) of this subsection and if the instructors of the training program are certified
trainers approved by the Board and the Secretary of Public Safety:
(1)     The basic training course approved by the Board and the Secretary of Public
Safety shall consist of a minimum of four hours of classroom training which
shall include all of the following:
a.      Legal limitations on the use of hand gunsfirearms and on the powers
and authority of an armed security guard.
b.      Familiarity with this section.
c.      Range firing and procedure and hand gunfirearm safety and
maintenance.
…."
SECTION 9. Article 1 of Chapter 74C of the General Statutes is amended by
adding a new section to read:
"§ 74C-13.1. Firearm training exemptions.
(a)     The following persons shall be exempt from the firearms training requirements of
G.S. 74C-13(b):
(1)     Persons who have successfully completed the North Carolina Basic Law
Enforcement Training and have successfully completed the first year of
probationary employment.
(2)     Persons who have retired either by years of service or by medical disability,
or separated in good standing as a sworn law enforcement officer from a
federal, State, county, or municipal law enforcement agency that included in
their duty the use and qualification of a firearm. Retirement or separation
must have occurred within three years of application pursuant to this
Chapter.
(3)     Military personnel who have been honorably discharged within three years
of application pursuant to this Chapter and who have a military occupation
specialty code which includes Military Police or Criminal Investigative
Division.
(4)     Proprietary employees providing security duties at a nuclear power plant
who have been trained and qualified pursuant to federal regulation.
(b)     An applicant claiming one of the exemptions in subsection (a) of this section from
the 20-hour course of armed guard instruction must provide the Board the following
documentation, as appropriate:
(1)     A copy of a North Carolina Basic Law Enforcement Training certificate and
a letter from the applicant's department verifying that the probationary
employment period has been completed.
(2)      Retirement documentation verifying sworn status or the card issued by the
North Carolina Criminal Justice Training & Standards Division authorizing
concealed carry under the "Law Enforcement Officers' Safety Act," Public
Law 108-277, as amended.
(3)     Documentation from a DD Form 214 noting a Military Police or Criminal
Investigations Division military occupational specialty.
(4)     Documentation of retirement or separation from a federal law enforcement
agency with an Office of Personnel Management job series of 1811 for
Criminal Investigation.
(5)     Documentation of current, direct employment with a nuclear power plant
located in this State.
(c)     The Board shall deny an exemption sought pursuant to this section if the applicant
fails to provide the documentation, as applicable, provided in subsection (b) of this section.
(d)     When utilizing this exemption, the applicant must qualify within the first three
attempts on the required firearm qualification course. If the applicant fails to qualify on both of
required courses of fire, the applicant shall be required to undergo the entire 20-hour course of
instruction.
(e)     When utilizing this exemption, the applicant must complete the legal block of
instruction required by G.S. 74C-13(h)(1) and the Board's administrative rules."
SECTION 10. G.S. 74C-17 reads as rewritten:
"§ 74C-17. Enforcement.
…
(c)     In lieu of revocation or suspension of a license or permit under G.S. 74C-12, a civil
penalty of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000) per violation may be assessed by the
Board against any person or business who violates any provision of this Chapter or any rule of
the Board adopted pursuant to this Chapter. In determining the amount of any penalty, the
Board shall consider the degree and extent of harm caused by the violation. The clear proceeds
of civil penalties provided for in this subsection shall be remitted to the Civil Penalty and
Forfeiture Fund in accordance with G.S. 115C-457.2.
…
(e)     The Board shall be entitled to charge costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, for
any proceeding governed by Chapter 150B of the General Statutes or authorized by this
section."
SECTION 11. G.S. 74C-23 reads as rewritten:
"§ 74C-23. Acquisition or change of ownership or control of licensed firm, association, or
corporation.
In the event a company, firm, or corporation licensed under this Chapter transfers
ownership, control, or a majority of assets to another person, firm, association, or corporation,
the person, firm, association, or corporation acquiring control or ownership shall have the
following responsibilities:
…
(4)     Provide to the Director within 60 10 calendar days from prior to the effective
date of the transaction the following:
a.      Aa list of all registrants or and licensees affected by the transaction.
b.      Written confirmation of completion of any changes necessary for the
acquiring party to comply with the requirements of this Chapter or
any applicable rules adopted by the Board on a form approved by the
Director.
(5)     Provide to the Director within 60 calendar days from the effective date of the
transaction, on a form provided by the Director, written confirmation of
completion of any changes necessary for the acquiring party to comply with
the requirements of this Chapter or any applicable rules adopted by the
Board."
SECTION 12. G.S. 14-269.3 reads as rewritten:
"§ 14-269.3. Carrying weapons into assemblies and establishments where alcoholic
beverages are sold and consumed.
…
(b)    This section shall not apply to any of the following:
…
(4)      A person registered or hired as a security guard guard, as described in
G.S. 74C-3(b)(13) who is hired by the owner, lessee, or person or
organization sponsoring the event.event or a person employed by an entity
licensed pursuant to G.S. 74C-2 who is hired by the owner, lessee, or person
or organization sponsoring the event.
…."
SECTION 13. Section 12 of this act becomes effective December 1, 2017. The
remainder of this act becomes effective July 1, 2017.