A HOUSE RESOLUTION ADOPTING THE PERMANENT RULES OF THE 2018 FIRST
EXTRA SESSION OF THE NORTH CAROLINA HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
Be it resolved by the House of Representatives:
SECTION 1. The permanent rules of the 2017 Regular Session of the House of
Representatives, with the following amendments, are adopted as the permanent rules of the 2018
First Extra Session:
(1)    RULE 1 shall read as follows: "RULE 1. Convening Hour. The House shall
convene each legislative day at the hour fixed by the House. In the event the
House adjourns on the preceding legislative day without having fixed an hour
for reconvening, the House shall convene on the next legislative day at 10:00
A.M."
(2)    Notwithstanding RULE 26, the Committee on Rules, Calendar, and
Operations of the House, the Ethics Committee, the Judiciary I, II, III, and IV
Committees, the Finance Committee, and the Appropriations Committee (not
including the Appropriations Committees for budget specific areas) shall be
comprised of the members who were appointed during the Regular Session
and other members as the Speaker may appoint at the beginning of the First
Extra Session. The Chairs and Vice-Chairs of those committees shall be those
who were appointed by the Speaker during the Regular Session.
(3)    Notwithstanding RULE 27, the standing committees of the House are:
Committees
a.      Rules, Calendar, and Operations of the House
b.      Ethics
c.      Judiciary I
d.      Judiciary II
e.      Judiciary III
f.      Judiciary IV
g.      Finance
h.      Appropriations
All rules of the 2017 Regular Session applicable to standing committees of
the House other than the committees named in this subdivision are
inoperative. The Speaker may appoint select committees and fill vacancies of
standing committees under RULE 26.
(4)    Notwithstanding RULE 31(a), any bill or resolution shall be introduced by
submitting the bill or resolution to the Principal Clerk's Office.
(5)    Notwithstanding RULES 31 and 31.1:
a.     The only resolutions that may be introduced or considered in the
House are resolutions adjourning the 2018 First Extra Session sine die.
b.       All bills shall be excluded from introduction or consideration in the
House, other than bills considering election laws.
(6)  RULE 31.1 shall not apply to resolutions adjourning the 2018 First Extra
Session sine die and bills considering election laws.
(7)  Notwithstanding RULES 32 and 41, a resolution or bill may be placed on the
calendar without being referred by the Speaker to a committee and on the same
legislative day of its introduction or receipt from the Senate.
(8)  Notwithstanding RULE 36(b) and (b1), a bill reported favorably by a
committee or received for concurrence may be placed on the favorable
calendar on the same day it is reported and a proposed committee substitute
does not have to be distributed electronically to committee members prior to
being considered by the committee.
(9)  Notwithstanding RULE 41:
a.       The first reading and reference to a standing committee of a House bill
shall occur on the legislative day of its introduction. The first reading
and reference to a standing committee of a Senate bill shall occur on
the legislative day of its receipt on messages from the Senate. The
Speaker shall give notice at each subsequent reading whether it is the
second or third reading.
b.       Except for a bill governed by Section 23 of Article II of the North
Carolina Constitution, a bill may be read more than once on the same
day.
(10) Notwithstanding RULE 44(d), a conference report may be placed on the
calendar for the legislative day on which the report is received.
(11) Notwithstanding RULE 44.2, a vote may be taken on overriding a
gubernatorial veto on a House or Senate bill the same legislative day of notice
of its placement on the calendar.
(12) Notwithstanding RULE 59, any member wishing to cosponsor a bill or
resolution that has been introduced may do so on the day during which the bill
or resolution was first read and referred, but only while the bill or resolution
is in the possession of the House.
SECTION 2. This resolution is effective upon adoption.