A SENATE RESOLUTION ADOPTING THE PERMANENT RULES OF THE SENATE FOR
THE 2018 FIRST EXTRA SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.
Be it resolved by the Senate:
SECTION 1. The permanent rules of the 2017 Regular Session, with the following
amendments, are the rules governing the 2018 First Extra Session of the General Assembly:
RULE 10. Points of order. – (a) The Presiding Officer shall preserve order and
decorum and proceed with the business of the Senate according to the rules adopted. The
Presiding Officer shall decide all questions of order, subject to an appeal to the Chairman of the
Committee on Rules and Operations of the Senate or in the Chair's absence the Vice-Chair of the
Committee on Rules and Operations of the Senate, whose decision may be appealed to the Senate
by any member, on which appeal no member shall speak more than once unless by leave of the
Senate. A two-thirds vote of the membership of the Senate present and voting is necessary to
sustain any appeal from the ruling of the Chairman of the Committee on Rules and Operations
of the Senate, or in the Chair's absence, the ruling of the Vice-Chair of the Committee on Rules
and Operations of the Senate.
(b)     In the event the Senate Rules do not provide for or cover any point of order
raised by any Senator, the rules of the United States House of Representatives shall govern.
(c)     When a Senator is called to order, that Senator shall take the assigned seat
until the Presiding Officer determines whether that Senator was in order or not; if decided to be
out of order, that Senator shall not proceed without the permission of the Senate; and every
question of order shall be decided by the Presiding Officer, subject to an appeal to the Chairman
of the Committee on Rules and Operations of the Senate or in the Chair's absence the Vice-Chair
of the Committee on Rules and Operations of the Senate, whose decision may be appealed to the
Senate by any Senator; and if a Senator is called to order for words spoken, the words to which
an exception is made shall be immediately preserved by the Principal Clerk, so that the Presiding
Officer, the Chairman or Vice-Chair of the Committee on Rules and Operations of the Senate, or
the Senate may be better able to judge the matter.
RULE 32. List of standing/select committees. – The standing committees shall be:
Senate Select Committee on Elections
Rules and Operations of the Senate
All committees shall be comprised of the members who were appointed to those
committees during the 2017 Regular Session.
RULE 40. Introduction of bills. – Every bill introduced shall contain on the Senate
e-jacket the title of the document and the name of the Senator or Senators presenting it. The
Principal Clerk of the Senate shall receive, number, and present each bill to the Senate for first
reading on the day it is filed.
RULE 40.1. Limitation on introduction and consideration of resolutions and
bills. – The only resolutions that may be introduced or considered in the Senate are resolutions
establishing the rules governing the First Extra Session and adjourning the First Extra Session
sine die. The only bills, parts of bills, or amendments to bills that may be introduced or considered
in the Senate are bills, parts of bills, or amendments to bills considering election laws.
RULE 41. (Reserved).
RULE 43. First reading; reference to committee. – All bills introduced and all
House bills received upon a message from the House of Representatives, upon presentation to
the Senate, shall be read in the regular order of business by their number and title which shall
constitute the first reading of the bill on the day on which they are received. The Chair of the
Committee on Rules and Operations of the Senate or, in the Chair's absence, the Vice-Chair of
the Committee, or the President Pro Tempore may refer to a Senate committee all bills introduced
in the Senate or received from the House of Representatives. Upon the referral being made, the
Chair of the Committee on Rules and Operations of the Senate shall notify the Principal Clerk of
the Senate of the referral, and the Reading Clerk shall announce the referral of the bill. The
Principal Clerk shall inform the Presiding Officer of the referral. The title and referral shall be
entered upon the Journal. Bills may be referred to more than one committee serially.
RULE 43.1. Second reading. – All bills reported by committee shall be placed before
the Senate for second reading and immediate consideration upon passage.
RULE 45.1. Action on amendment or committee substitute. – If any committee
recommends adoption of an amendment or committee substitute of a bill or resolution, the
amendment or committee substitute shall be considered adopted upon the reading of the
committee report. The bill or resolution, as amended, or its adopted committee substitute may be
placed on the calendar for the same legislative day or re-referred if the bill or resolution was
serially referred. The committee substitute's original bill or resolution shall lie on the table.
RULE 50. Third reading requirements. – When a bill or resolution has passed its
second reading, it shall be placed on the calendar for immediate consideration on its third reading,
unless prohibited by Section 23 of Article II of the North Carolina Constitution.
RULE 56.1. Amendments and committee substitutes adopted by the House to
bills originating in the Senate. – (a) Whenever the House has adopted an amendment or a
committee substitute for a bill originating in the Senate and has returned the bill to the Senate for
concurrence in that amendment or committee substitute, the Senate may concur in that
amendment or committee substitute on the same legislative day.
RULE 59. (Reserved).
RULE 59.2. Vetoed bills. – (a) The Principal Clerk, or in the Clerk's absence an
employee designated by the Principal Clerk, is designated the Senate Officer to receive bills
vetoed by the Governor. If the veto message is received on a day when the Senate is in session,
it may be read in the Senate on the day of its receipt. If the veto message is received on a day
when the Senate is not in session, or if was not read on the legislative day when it was received,
it shall be read on the next legislative day.
(b)     Upon a veto message's being read in the Senate, the Chair of the Committee
on Rules and Operations of the Senate, or in the absence of the Chair, the President Pro Tempore
of the Senate shall either refer the bill and the Governor's objections and veto message to
committee or place the bill on the calendar for a day certain.
SECTION 2. This resolution is effective upon adoption.